To talk of Lucy’s young man seemed to her something like blasphemy.
Naturally, she was becoming a purist about language as she learned what
nicety of speech meant. She was a great deal more shocked than Lucy
would have been.

“Well,” said Matilda, stoutly, “he is her young man. What is wrong in
that? They’ve been going up and down like two young people keeping
company this hour or more, while you have been watching the sky (of
course she exaggerated the time), and nothing a bit wrong in it that I
can see. You’ve done the same yourself--and so would I if it had come in
my way,” said honest Matilda. Then, however, her voice sank, and she
took her sister by the arm. “That’s not half,” she said, “Nancy, dear!
and the most important’s to come. Do you remember Durant, that came to
Underhayes with Arthur? You must remember Durant--him that Sarah Jane
took such a fancy to.”

“I remember Mr. Durant,” said fastidious Nancy. “I don’t know why _you_
should talk of him so familiarly.”

“Oh, have done with your fine talk and your nonsense!” cried Matilda.
“Look here, he’s _there_, Nancy! I tell you he’s there, close by,
courting Miss Lucy. You can come and look for yourself if you don’t
trust me.”

Nancy came slowly, half forced by the eager Matilda, but already turning
over in her mind what expedients would be necessary to escape this
sudden turn of affairs. Durant! (She allowed herself to drop the Mr. in
her thoughts.) He would find her out, she knew, before many hours were
out. She could not keep her secret from him; he would find her, and
write to Arthur, and make or mar everything. What was she to do? A great
conflict arose within her. She was sick enough of this state of affairs,
and if Durant did intervene to end it, would there be so very much to
regret? Arthur would come home, he would come to her, and there would be
a reconciliation, and all would be well. But then, on the other hand,
she had to own, with a sickening sensation in her heart, that already
Arthur must have been for some time aware of “what had happened,” and he
had not hastened home to her. And the idea that Durant might write to
him, send for him as a matter of duty, sent all the blood coursing
through her veins. Never! never! She would die first. Even short of
that, how much pleasanter it would be to manage everything herself, to
leave it to Providence, than that, anyhow, Durant should step in. All
these thoughts rushed in a heap into her mind, tumultuous, rolling and
rushing over each other like clouds before the wind, as she took the
half-dozen steps necessary to bring her to Matilda’s point of vision to
verify what Matilda had seen. But it did not require any verification to
Nancy. She had felt sure it was true from the first moment. It was
exactly the thing that was most likely to happen. She looked through the
thorn branches, however, with a wakening of sympathy, such as she had
scarcely yet felt, in Lucy. Lucy of late had been lost in Sir John and
her ladyship; and when she had thought of her specially it was with
jealous fear rather than sympathy. Now she watched her with a curious
mingling of interest and opposition. It seemed wrong to Nancy that Miss
Curtis should be here with a young man without the knowledge of her
father and mother; and Durant, Durant, who had his living to make like
any common man! She remembered very well what Arthur had told her about
him. He, it was clear, could be no match for Lucy; it was not right, it
was not _nice_ of Lucy. The forehead of Mrs. Arthur contracted. She did
not like any coming down in the family with which she was connected. She
liked to think of them all as very great people indeed, quite above that
necessity of working for a living which brought down Durant to the
ordinary level of man. All this, however, was by the way; and the
immediate thing she had to consider was what she herself would do in
this new emergency. She ended hastily at last, when the pair of lovers
(since they could be nothing else) turned their faces towards the Hall.
Nancy seized her sister’s arm, and without saying anything rushed
hastily towards the stile. They got over it, and out of the gates, while
still the backs of the others were turned; and then for the moment the
two young women ventured to take breath and feel themselves safe.

“They were going up towards the house,” said Nancy; “we have no need to
hurry.” But she gave looks of alarm behind her, and walked rapidly back
to the cottage. As ill luck would have it they met the Rector, who
stopped, as he always did, and kept them talking. When he had insisted
on planting himself in their path for a full minute, Nancy got
desperate. He was to be got rid of, she felt, at all hazards.

“We met Miss Curtis in the avenue just now,” she said. “She had a
gentleman with her. Do you know if there is a gentleman of the name of
Durant, or something like that, visiting at the Hall?”

“Oh, Durant is there, is he?” said the Rector, with a look of annoyance.
“Yes, I know him. He used to be very intimate then; but I had hoped he
had not been so much in favour of late. I say frankly, ‘I hope,’ for I
am not fond of him. He is a nobody, a--perhaps you have met him, Mrs.
Arthur. He has got into very good society, somehow or other; but he is
nobody.”

“I think I have seen him somewhere; but you will find him now in the
avenue with Miss Curtis; and we must hurry back,” she said, nodding and
smiling as she went on. She liked Durant a great deal better than she
liked Bertie; but to escape from her present dilemma was more important
than either. “Now, Matilda, make haste; let us get home,” she said. She
had sent the Rector “after them,” not without a certain malicious
pleasure. She had freed herself from the immediate danger in which she
lay. He would talk, and they would be obliged to listen, as, otherwise,
Nancy would have been; and with another anxious look behind, she sped
along the road. But it was an unlucky day. In the village street they
met Mrs. Rolt, who also had a thousand things to say. She rushed across
the street with a budget full of news, and laughed and joked, and
congratulated the young stranger on having made such an impression upon
Sir John. Mrs. Rolt told Nancy that she had been at the Hall immediately
after luncheon, and that Sir John would talk of nothing else.

“And he is a very good friend, a faithful friend, though he is not very
demonstrative,” said Cousin Julia; “but, indeed, my dear, he was quite
demonstrative about you, and talked of you all the time. Mr. Durant was
there,” she added confidentially, “and I don’t think he much wanted Mr.
Durant. You know there was always a kindness between him and Lucy; but
it would be quite out of the question for Lucy, quite out of the
question, especially since her brother’s unfortunate marriage.”

“What has her brother’s marriage got to do with it?” cried Nancy,
forgetting, in this unexpected attack, even her fears.

“Oh, my dear, don’t you know what a dreadful thing it is for the family?
It has spoiled Arthur’s life, poor fellow. Where are the heirs to come
from?” Cousin Julia cried pathetically. “However bad she might be, it
would not be quite so bad, you know, if there were any heirs; but the
succession, my dear! Lucy must marry, and she must marry well, or what
is to become of the family?” Mrs. Rolt said with decision. “She, too,
will have to suffer for her brother. The innocent are always involved
with the guilty; and when once a wrong thing has been done, one never
knows where it may end.”

Nancy had grown crimson with shame and resentment--and with pain too,
pain that she could not fathom in all its complexities. She turned away
coldly from Mrs. Rolt, scarcely attempting to separate from her with the
pretence at civility, which good manners (she felt) demanded. The
innocent involved with the guilty! how dared anyone so speak of her? She
went on to her cottage, forgetting her previous alarms, holding her head
high, and she did not take any notice of the sound of wheels behind
her, the rapid dash of a dog-cart which came whirling along and round
the corner from the Hall. But she came to herself with a start and cry,
when turning round suddenly she met Durant’s look, which flashed from
the ordinary calm of an indifferent passer-by into profound surprise and
instant eagerness at sight of her. The dog-cart was going so fast, with
so much “way” upon it, that it was a minute before it could be drawn up
and he could spring down from it. In that minute, Nancy aroused to the
necessity of the case, had darted down a little side alley, by which she
knew she could reach the back-door of the cottage. Fortunately there was
nobody about to see her fly along past the little gardens to the open
kitchen door. She darted in to the alarm of Fanny, and flying breathless
upstairs rushed to the shelter of her own room.

“If anyone calls I am ill in bed,” she cried, as she passed, to the
consternation of the little maid. Matilda, by this time was quietly
seated in the little sitting-room at work. “Come up with me, come up
with me. Durant is after me!” cried Nancy, breathless. Matilda had
presence of mind to obey without a word, though she made a mental
memorandum as she went upstairs after her sister. “She says Durant,
too,” Matilda said to herself--but she made no audible protest; and from
a corner between the curtains she watched and reported how the dog-cart
waited, and how long a time it was before the visitor came back baffled,
after following down the alley and finding nothing.

“He is looking very suspicious-like at all the houses,” said Matilda.

“Oh, keep close, keep close!” cried Nancy, from the bed on which she was
crouching--as if he could see in through the curtains. They spent an
anxious half-hour watching his proceedings, for the dog-cart drove away
and then came back, and their fears were renewed for another tremulous
moment. But Durant fortunately did not apply to anyone who could give
him information. He trusted apparently to his own sharp-sightedness, or
to the hope that Nancy had hidden herself, and would reappear again. The
sisters did not venture to draw breath until it was clear that he was
gone.

Here was another and important embarrassment and difficulty in their
way. They did not know that Durant’s day’s occupation had been so very
important to himself as to eclipse all other interests. They thought he
would come back next day to search thoroughly, and make sure that they
did not escape him. For to Nancy in the present crisis it was evident
that nothing else could be half so important; her own affairs naturally
appeared to her the most likely subject to absorb Durant’s thoughts.




CHAPTER X.


The explanation between Durant and Lucy, of which Nancy had been, so to
speak, a spectator, and which had filled her with such doubtful
feelings, before the moment when she apprehended peril to herself--had
taken place under difficulties. It was only when driven up into a corner
by his repeated appeals that Lady Curtis had given a doubtful and
reluctant assent--it did not deserve so cordial a title as consent--to
his petition--which was only that he might be allowed to refer the
question to Lucy herself. “If she says no, there will not be another
word to say,” he had represented. Lady Curtis had only replied by
shaking her head, a gesture which filled him with exhilaration, though
after all it might have meant something different from the conclusion
he drew from it. But after the confused meal, which he was so anxious to
get over and so impatient of, it was some time before Lucy’s attention
could be secured. She was coy and unwilling, and half-angry, he thought,
while her mother, though so affectionate to himself, would have been
glad enough to stave off the interview which she had reluctantly
promised might take place between them. She would not go back from her
word; but if she could manage to get it postponed, deferred till the
last moment, Lady Curtis would have felt that something was gained. And
things seemed to fall out in harmony with her purpose as the afternoon
went on. Sir John took possession of Durant in the first place to show
him something, and then Lady Curtis managed to keep by Lucy’s side,
hoping that the time at which he had settled to leave them would have
come too near for any explanation before the opportunity came. But
Durant was not the kind of man to be so baffled by circumstances. When
he saw the policy she was pursuing (and which, with an hypocrisy which
half-maddened, half-amused, half-touched him, she seemed to confess and
beg pardon for, with deprecating beseeching looks) he broke openly
through the maze she was entangling his feet in. He went up to Lucy
boldly as she sat by her mother’s side.

“There is something that I want to say to you,” he said, with a
tremulousness very unlike his usual steady tones. “Your mother has
permitted me to ask you--to hear me--”

“Do not say that, Lewis, do not say that,” cried Lady Curtis. “I could
not forbid it--that was all.”

“It comes to the same thing. Will you hear what I have to say--will you
listen to me? It may be nothing to you, but it is everything in the
world to me!”

Lucy grew crimson red, then pale, then red again. “Can you say it here?”
she asked, in a scarcely audible voice.

“Anywhere, wherever you will, no place can change what I have to say;
but rather alone,” he cried, growing so agitated that his words were
half inarticulate too. Lady Curtis got up with a sigh to leave them. But
Lucy felt the atmosphere of the room, the sense of constraint in the
very air, stifle her. She sprang up hurriedly. “Stay here, mamma, I will
go out with Lewis,” she said, scarcely knowing what she said. It was
quite unawares that this unconscious familiar utterance of his name
anticipated everything more she could say on her side, as his appeal had
forestalled everything on his. She caught up her hat and a shawl as she
went out, then turned to him with a question in her eyes--was it a
question? She knew as well as he did, and he knew as well she did. Had
it not all been settled years ago?

Lady Curtis was very restless when she was thus left behind. She had
given her unwilling assent only on hard conditions--that nothing more
than this one interview should at present pass between the lovers--that
no formal engagement should be made or correspondence begun, and nothing
as yet be said to Sir John. She was to “manage” him as best she could,
taking her opportunity; nothing was to be hurried or forced. They were
to wait the next change in the drama of Arthur’s fortunes. If anything
happened in that, Sir John might be more easy to manage. But though she
set up all these imaginary defences round her, Lady Curtis knew very
well that in ceding one point she had virtually ceded all. How keep two
persons who understood each other, who were faithful to each other, who
could neither be coerced nor frightened, apart? the thing was
impossible. It might be done for a time making everybody uncomfortable,
but the means of permanently afflicting Lucy, whom her parents loved,
who was more precious to them than all the rest of the world! This was
folly she knew. Sir John might resist, and he would regret--but yield he
must if they insisted. And what could Lucy do else? Lady Curtis was, as
she avowed to herself, with a smile and a tear, a little in love with
Lewis too. He was so kind, so true, so good a stay and support to all
belonging to him; he was--what need to prolong descriptions--Lewis; and
had not all been said in that word for years? Of course Lucy would
insist: not undutifully, not untenderly, but steadily, and to the end of
her days; there would be no passion, no tragedy--but she would never
change. Her mother knew this as well as she knew her child’s name, and
began to consider, as she wandered about restless, wondering when they
would come back again, wondering what they could find to say to each
other so long, wondering at Durant’s determination and Lucy’s courage,
how she could make the best of it and reconcile herself to the
inevitable. He would be successful in his profession, that there seemed
no doubt of now--he would reach, perhaps, the bench, and then Lucy might
be Lady Durant. Lady Curtis shrugged her shoulders at this prospect. She
was apt to gibe at her own position, and talk of “we Commoners;” but
legal honours of that description were lowlier than any lowliness which
could be affected by the head of a great county family, tenth baronet,
with dormant titles in his race which he did not care to claim. Lady
Durant! “granddaughter-in-law of old Durant, you know, the saddler.”
This was what would be said. Lady Curtis thought she could hear the very
sound of the voices lightly tripping over these syllables. To be sure
many greater ladies than she had accepted the sons of _parvenus_ for
their daughters. Duchesses did it every day; but then dukes were made
for that sort of thing, she said to herself with a smile; were they not
a kind of coroneted steam-engines to drag up the lower classes? very
different from us, Commoners. There was always the woolsack it is true,
an institution which does a great deal for the _noblesse_ of the robe.
With a whimsical half-amusement she began to calculate whether she was
likely to live to see Lewis Lord Chancellor. He might do it (if he was
ever going to do it) in twenty years. Twenty years would suffice as well
as a hundred. Lady Curtis was but forty-seven, there was no particular
reason why she should not live as long as that, and such an elevation
of course would very much sweeten the Lady Durant.

But how long these two were? What could they possibly find to say to
each other? It was close upon the hour at which Lewis had ordered his
dog-cart, and he had a long drive before him. Then she went to her room
and put on her outdoor garments, and went out to meet the lovers. She
walked down the avenue half-satisfied, half-vexed that they had gone so
far. Why should they have preferred to get out of sight of the house?
and yet it was better that they should not thus suddenly thrust
themselves under the observation of Sir John. With a flutter in her
bosom of mingled pleasure and pain, she perceived them in the distance.
It hurt her infinitesimally, yet consciously, to see her Lucy, her shy,
delicate, fastidious flower of maidenhood, leaning upon any man’s arm
_so_; and yet the happiness in Lucy’s bosom was it not almost her own.
When she came up to them herself blushing, and half abashed to meet
their eyes, the young man was so bold as to come up to her, under her
own trees, and kiss her cheek. He had done it once before when she
clung to him in the depths of her trouble; but there was a dauntless
assurance in this kiss which startled her. She might, perhaps, have
crushed him under her frown with severe disapproval, but that the
dog-cart at that moment was audible, coming rapidly down upon them.
There was no time to be angry when he was going away. She took her
daughter’s arm when he was gone, drawing it closely into hers as they
stood aside to watch him dash down the avenue, for he was late. Lady
Curtis held Lucy close, and the daughter clung to the mother; but is the
clinging ever so close again, after a man’s arm has had that softest,
warmest pressure? Lady Curtis, with a sigh, felt the difference--or
thought she did, which comes to the same thing.

And as Durant drove away, with his head full of Lucy, he was suddenly
transfixed, shot point-blank, as it were, by the eyes of Mrs. Arthur,
raised in surprise and alarm to his face. Nancy! here! It was so
incredible, and his mind was so preoccupied, that he almost upset his
dog-cart, pulling it up with a jerk, then dropped the reins, which had
been held so firmly, on the horse’s neck. He did not know if he was
awake or dreaming as he stumbled down, the surprise was so great, the
shock so sudden. Nancy! It seemed to him that there was a kind of
suggestion of help, a thread of guidance thrown out to him by this
sudden apparition. He rushed after her, asking one or two gaping
wayfarers who had not perceived her, who the lady was, as he followed
her track; but fear had given wings to Nancy, and she had reached
shelter before he came in sight. He wandered about aimlessly for some
little time, as has been seen, asking vague questions, and gazing about
at the houses. But as nobody had seen the lady to whom he referred, and
as in his excitement his description, perhaps, was less clear than
usual, he made nothing by his inquiries. They pointed out Mrs. Rolt’s
house to him, which he knew, and everything in it; and as the evening
was already falling, Durant felt himself forced at last to resume his
way. He could not make out all that he expected, all that seemed to
flutter about through the confusion in his thoughts--possibilities for
the future, new lights, new likelihoods; for it must be remembered that
his mind was already in a whirl with all that had happened to himself
within the last half-dozen hours--more than had happened for the
half-dozen years before, or, indeed, during all his life.

There was to be no correspondence; yet Lady Curtis was not surprised to
get a letter next day, enclosing one for Lucy.

“Just this once,” he pleaded; “and not for mere gratification of writing
to her. There is something I want to tell her. You will not refuse me
this once.”

Lady Curtis did not refuse him. She gave the note to Lucy with a smile
and a sigh, and a little shrug of her shoulders.

“What is this great thing he has to tell you, I wonder? The same thing,
I suppose, that he took so long to tell you the other day.”

“Indeed, it must be something he has forgotten,” said Lucy, with simple
seriousness; but she took the note upstairs to read in her own room,
running off on pretence of wanting something--a pretence which her
mother, with another sigh and shrug of her shoulders, understood well
enough. And, indeed, Durant had not failed to take advantage of his
opportunity. The little letter was a love-letter, a kind of thing which
is too exquisite for common touch; but it had a postscript, which was
its _raison d’être_.

“_This is what I shall want to be always telling you, what I shall tell
you in my heart daily and hourly till I have you there in real presence,
my Lucy_,” the deceiver wrote; and then, with a twist of his hand, in a
changed writing even, “But I should not have dared to write but for a
strange fact I found out after I left you--ARTHUR’S WIFE IS IN OAKLEY.
It seems incredible, but it is true. I saw her on the road. She
disappeared at the sight of me by a back-lane, and must have gone into
some house. You will tell them or not, as you please; but I must tell
_you_. There seems, I can’t quite tell how, hope for ourselves in it.
My darling!” And then the other kind of writing began again, with which
we sober-minded persons have nothing to do.

Lucy, it may be supposed, was extremely excited by this communication;
not just at first, it must be allowed, not till she had read it about
six times over did the real point of it strike her mind. At first it was
the other part of the letter that occupied her; and when Lady Curtis
said, smiling, “What was the great piece of news--an old enough story, I
suppose?” Lucy meant no deception in her response. But by and by the
fact began to acquire its real importance in her mind. She had no longer
a moment’s doubt on the subject; had not instinct whispered it to her at
once? Nancy was here, within her reach, within her influence; and only
one thing could be meant by this, that the rebellious young woman who
had made Arthur so unhappy, had seen the error of her ways, and was
willing to depart from them, to seek the favour of her husband’s
family, to endeavour to please them, that there might be a
reconciliation and universal pardoning of all offences, in prospect.
Lucy, when she wholly realized the important fact thus communicated to
her, was lost in perplexity. What was she to do? A strange reluctance
sprang up in her mind to speak of it, to bring it to any one’s
observation. Would it not be better to let this strange young woman, by
whom Lucy had at once been attracted and repelled, work out her
intentions, whatever they were? It was not natural that the young lady
should think with special kindness, or, indeed, without a certain
prejudice, of this interloper. Lucy’s feeling, to start with, had been
all in her sister-in-law’s favour. Before the marriage had taken place,
when the question was whether Arthur should be persuaded or forced into
faithlessness to his promise, Lucy had been Nancy’s faithful, if
reserved, supporter. She had been horrified by the suggestion that a
man’s plighted word and promised love were not binding, when the woman
to whom they were pledged was in an inferior class. This doctrine had
shocked and revolted every feeling in her heart, and when her family had
made ignoble efforts to buy off Nancy, Lucy had been as indignant as
Arthur was. But now everything was changed. The resemblances in nature
and the diversity in circumstances, which gave her a fellow-feeling with
this girl in one stage of her history, gave her a certain sense of
repulsion now. She had thought it a mere foolish imagination on her part
to identify Mrs. Arthur at the Wren Cottage with Nancy; but even while
doing so, Lady Curtis’s ready prepossession in her favour, and the easy
fascination she had exercised over Sir John, had given Lucy a slight
involuntary prick of displeasure. What did they see in this young woman
to be so readily pleased by her? She was pretty. Was that all that was
necessary? Lucy was in no way injured by it, it took nothing from her,
yet she felt more than half angry at the rapid conquest of her parents
which the stranger had made. They were quite absurdly interested in her.
Why? Sir John spoke of her as if she had been a princess, and even her
mother, who, as a woman, should have had more discrimination, had been
disposed to rave about this new face, in which, after all, there was no
such dazzling beauty as to carry the world by storm. Lucy had been a
little vexed with herself for feeling this, yet she had felt it. She had
been inclined in her own person to bestow her attention upon the homely
sister, who was a good modest little body and claimed no one’s
admiration. And when this strange certainty came to confirm the guess,
which even to herself had seemed too fantastic for fact, Lucy felt an
instant increase of prejudice, an almost dislike for which she could
give no reason, and which was at once impolitic and unkind. Why should
her mind turn against Nancy now? Was it not for the interest of the
family as well as her own that she should in every way cultivate the
possibility of reunion between Arthur and his wife? It must be for
Arthur’s good that he should be delivered out of his false position, and
should live out his life honestly, having chosen it; and it must be to
the advantage of the family that its heir should be replaced in his
natural place, both for the present and the future. Finally, there could
be no doubt whatever that it would be for Lucy’s own interest in the new
development of her lot. If Arthur was like any other young married man,
united to a wife whom his parents had learned to like at least, whether
they approved of her or not, how much easier would everything be for the
now impossible marriage of the daughter who at present was their only
hope! But it cannot be said that this suggestion of her own lessened
value and importance, and the likelihood that Nancy might free her by
taking her place in her father’s house, was at all an agreeable thought
to Lucy Curtis. It might promote her “happiness;” but it certainly, for
the moment, did not make her more happy. She was unreasonable--as we all
are more or less. Yes, she would be glad that Arthur should be “happy,”
that all should go well; but to think of her mother’s sudden fancy for
this stranger, of her father’s swift subjugation, of Nancy holding her
own place at Oakley, doing all the things she had done, accepted by
everybody as the young lady of the place, this was hard upon Lucy. For
the moment it gave her an almost intolerable prick--though she took
herself to task for it instantly with hot rage and self-contempt. How
mean and poor, what a wretched pitiful creature she was!

Then, however, after all this feeling, came the practical side of the
matter. Should she let her mother know? Lucy had no secrets from her
mother, except indeed that one of her love, before her love had been
openly asked for--a thing which not the most tenderly confidential of
daughters could be expected to disclose. She made an heroic effort to
clear from her mind all prejudice, all momentary and accidental
irritation of feeling. Which was best? To let this incognito have its
full value, to permit Arthur’s wife to have the entire advantage of the
effort she was visibly making, and keep her secret? If it were
prematurely revealed it was possible that the effort itself would tell
against Nancy, at least with Lady Curtis. To let her do her best, to say
nothing, to give her the chance of making them her friends, would not
that be the kindest thing that Arthur’s sister could do? The conclusion
is very easily stated, but it took a long time to arrive at; but it was
on this that Lucy decided at last.

“Will you reply for me?” she said to her mother; “no--I am not going to
exceed your permission, mamma. I will abide by my promise not to write.
Say from me,” said Lucy with a blush, “that I--respond in my heart to
all he says; but that, at present, on all subjects it is best not to
speak. Will you tell him that word for word.”

“Faithfully, my darling--and thank you, my Lucy,” said the mother,
kissing her, with the quick moisture rising in her eyes. Then she added
with a smile, “I suppose I may give him--your love?”

Lady Curtis was not hard upon the young people after all.




CHAPTER XI.


Arthur Curtis had not been leading a self-denying or ascetic life;
indeed he had been nearer the depths of moral decadence in the recent
months than ever before. He had got reckless about himself and his life;
not coarsely reckless, as men are who plunge into the ruder
dissipations, but so discouraged and weary that by mere dint of ceasing
to care what he did, he had ceased to do well, and almost dropped into
the gulf on the opposite side. He had been foolish enough in the past,
but his aim had been towards, if not the most exalted objects of
ambition, yet those of honesty, truth, faithfulness, and pure living. It
might have been unwise to love as he did, so far out of the region he
himself belonged to; but, at least, his love brought no harm to any one,
and had no evil thought in it. He had been faithful to it,
notwithstanding everything that had come in his way; opposition and
entreaty on the side of his family, and partial disgust and discontent
on his own, had not moved him; but of what good had all his faithfulness
been? What good had his honesty and pure intentions done him? He was
stranded upon the shore--laid aside helpless and with little hope from
the graver developments of existence. He was bound for life to the wife
who had become a stranger to him--who had thrust him away from her; and
hopelessly cut off from all other honourable connections, from the
happiness of home, from everything which makes up to a young man for the
loss of his first freedom. Arthur had all the evils of that freedom
without the good of it; he was bound yet let loose, tempted to every
kind of license, yet in such a position that ordinary and innocent
liberty was denied to him. Nothing could be more cruel to a
high-spirited young man not trained in the ways of self-denial. And by
the time these two years were over he had become sick of it all: The
restraints that confined him, the conscience which reminded him of these
restraints, and the injured love that gnawed at his heart and felt like
rage. What good had come to him of all his efforts to do well--of all
the honest meaning of his soul? The gayest and least self-denying of his
comrades was better off than he; and he had been on the borders of
vice--not compelled by any force of passion, but rather by disgust and
unwilling cynicism, the what does it matter? of the despairing soul. On
the borders of vice--and half-unbelieving in anything better--half
giving up all that was better in this world--trying to persuade himself
that nothing mattered. Youth comes to this alternative of happiness very
easily. The wisdom which has found out that in happiness, or
unhappiness, life jogs on much the same, and that all is not unmitigated
evil in the worst circumstances, nor unmitigated good in the best; is
an elderly kind of wisdom. But Arthur was impatient of his own
hopelessness--he felt his own weariness intolerable; which is as much as
to say that neither the hopelessness nor the impatience was entirely
genuine, or had half the sway he thought of in his heart.

Their immediate effect however, was a great bitterness and restlessness,
and distaste for everything around him. He had got to hate his new life,
his occupations, and the pleasures which perhaps palled more quickly
than his occupations; and all that flutter of diplomatic talk, which is
so like the flutter of the smallest parish business, but that the topics
are more important. Those personal discussions and reports, the “he
said” and “she said” which pretend to be of vital importance when the
hes and the shes are kings and queens, but are so like common gossip in
every other respect became tiresome beyond description. All this which
had carried him away from his own presumably small affairs at first, and
had sounded great and magnificent, sickened him now with its
paltriness. “Depend upon it the Emperor meant so and so.” “But I assure
you Count A---- said--” What was a man the better for this? he asked
himself with disdain Nothing at all the better, much the worse, as
having it urged upon his attention that mere gossip and nonsensical
bustle, and officious fussiness thrust themselves in at the gravest
moments, and have a part in the greatest events. Mrs. Bates discussing
the affairs of her chapel and the private dissensions between the
minister and the deacons, or a Secretary of Legation busily calculating
how the Emperor and Count A. and Prince B. contradicted each other, what
was the difference? Was it not all petty, miserable, unworthy? What was
a man the better of it? And though the _salons_ were more lovely and the
style of conversation more graceful, was not the subject everywhere much
the same as in the parlour at Underhayes, in which Arthur had made such
close acquaintance with the vulgarities of life? He was disgusted with
them all. The only good under the sun was surely to enjoy as much as
you could where you could, leaving all other considerations aside. Be
happy--if that come within your powers--but if not happy, then be
amused, if you are able to be so, distracted from your own thoughts,
entertained, if not by the love and kindness, at least by the folly, and
affectations, and self-regard of others. This creed was not naturally to
the taste of a frank and open-hearted young man, sympathetic with his
fellow-creatures, manly, and friendly, and gentle of heart; but his
unhappiness had given him a twist, and all the training he was at
present subject, to all the influences round him, led him that way. What
did it matter? Let us eat and drink for to-morrow we die. Arthur was on
the eve of ceding to this creed. He was on the edge of that pit which is
bottomless, and in which there is so little hope; and he might have
ended by being a gay infidel, a chill but laughing cynic, even an
unbeliever in everything good, who should not only accept that negative
of every virtue, but be amused by it, the last degradation. He had all
but given in, when Durant’s letter telling him of the disappearance of
Nancy came suddenly into his life like a thunderbolt. He had thought as
little about Nancy as possible, poor fellow! She was living the life she
had chosen to live under the protection of her parents in the home she
preferred. Arthur knew the half-savage reserve and purity of the girl
too well to have any doubt of her honour to him. It was not that she
could transfer her heart to another; but that she had no heart at all so
far as he was concerned; not that she was unfaithful in love, but that
she could live without love. He had written to her without eliciting any
answer at first; then he had ceased to write; he had heard nothing of
her for about eighteen months, except that her money was paid; not a
sign of her had come to him in all that time. His heart had gone through
all the stages of longing, of waiting, of dire anxiety, of lingering
hope against hope. And then he had turned resolutely away from the
ungrateful one. He never mentioned so much as her name to anyone, he
gave up his correspondence with Durant, he dropped this past of his in
that grave of obscurity into which so many men cast, one after another,
in broken pieces, the lives they have thrown away. It was not his fault,
or at least it was very far from being all his fault that these chances
of life had been thrown away; but now let them go and let no one attempt
to make any wail over them. She was well off, among the people she liked
best, well cared for, cherished as she chose to be cherished, though not
as he would have cherished her. Let her be. She was his, but she was not
for him, nor could anyone else be for him. She had desolated the life
which he had consecrated to her. Henceforward there was a blank in it
which she would not, and which no one else could fill. The legitimate
ties, the purer hopes were over. But there were other solaces more
cheaply to be had--if he could have persuaded himself to accept those
husks which the swine eat; and to these last degrading feasts he was
making up his mind.
