Varsek shook his head. "No accusation, Brinna. Merely a statement. I
know how it eats on your soul that you probably never will command a
fleet just on account of your sex." He grinned at her. "Sex isn't the
whole story, Brinna. I'm merely pointing that out to you. Ability and
toughness have something to do with it too. Isn't that so, Makvern?"

"I suppose so, sir."

The man in the pit howled like a tortured animal. Varsek pushed a
button impatiently and the rods stopped flickering and the howling
ceased.

"Very well," said Varsek, turning away, "take your delicate stomach
away from here. And maybe you can put your sex to some use with the
prisoner. Try it, anyway. The rest of you stay here."

Brinna saluted, turned smartly on her heel, snapped, "Follow me," at
Wyatt, and marched toward the door. Wyatt glanced at Makvern, who
refused to look at him, and went after Brinna.

He was thankful to get out of the room. Sick and raging himself, he did
not feel like talking and Brinna's face discouraged him anyway. The way
her bootheels rang on the iron floor he thought that she was wishing
Varsek's head under every one. Finally, when they had left even the
level of the pit-room behind and were walking together along an upper
corridor with nobody else in sight, he did speak.

"Are you plotting with the Second Party, Brinna?" he asked.

"No," she said savagely. "I am not. I hate everything they stand for."

"But you are plotting against Varsek?"

She stopped and looked at him with eyes as lambent as those of an angry
cat.

"If you have thoughts of helping your own cause by going to Varsek
about me, forget them. In the first place, Varsek helps nobody. In the
second place, I can have you silenced before you could ever get to him."

"No," said Wyatt slowly, "I wasn't thinking of going to Varsek. But
what he said about you is true. You do want the command. You figured
that Earth, armed and prepared, would give Varsek such a setback that
you might be able to oust him and take over."

"Do you blame me?" whispered Brinna. "He's a swine. A cruel,
treacherous, sadistic swine. You saw him. No wonder there's a Second
Party."

"How big is it, Brinna?"

"Big enough to worry Varsek. Loran is the third poor devil he's
tortured to death trying to find out who's in it. He hasn't managed
it yet, but he will. And then--" She made an expressive gesture of
slashing.

"You said you hated everything the Second Party stands for. What does
it stand for?"

"Peace," said Brinna, as though it was a shameful word. "They want
to take the Task Force home and force the government to stop this
galaxy-wide swing of conquest."

"And you don't want peace?"

"I'm a soldier. What use would I be at peace?" Her face was hard,
shining, exalted with ambition. "Not while I'm still young and
unsatisfied, anyway. Listen, Wyatt. I told you women are not segregated
and discriminated against in our society and that's true--except for
top positions of power in politics and the military. Even there it's
never stated openly. But somehow or other the women candidates never
quite make it. I'm going to be the first one to break that custom. I am
going to command this Task Force."

       *       *       *       *       *

She put her hand on his arm, speaking rapidly, with urgent force. "I'm
not alone, Wyatt. I have a powerful group behind me. Varsek isn't
popular with the officers. The men love him because he wins battles and
looks the other way when they abuse the native women, but they don't
have to deal with him. All we need is an excuse--a demonstration that
Varsek has blundered badly--and we can step in. _I_ can step in. Earth
could give us that excuse, if your people put up enough of a surprise
fight. So you see our interests do run together."

"That far, they do," said Wyatt. "But afterward?"

"What do you mean, afterward?"

"After you take over. What happens to Earth then?" He shook her hand
away. "Don't treat me like a fool, Brinna. You don't take over from
Varsek on the grounds that he's failed and then admit that you too are
licked by the same situation."

Her eyes had narrowed and the anger-light was in them again. "So?"

"So you will then proceed to smash my world. You have to, to prove
you're more capable than Varsek. Otherwise, somebody will oust _you_."

"I warned you before not to let your cleverness betray you," she said.
"Let's be realistic about this. Earth is our next target, she's going
to be hit warning or no warning, and she's going to be beaten. Now.
Do you imagine Earth can get better and more merciful treatment from
Varsek, or from me?"

"When you put it that way," Wyatt said thoughtfully, "I can see a
preference. All right, Brinna. When do you think you can arrange the
escape?"

"The only chance will be some time during the attack on Alpha Centauri.
I'll get word to you as soon as the arrangements are made, but don't
get impatient. You heard Varsek. I'll have to move very cautiously."

"And what happens to me in the meantime?"

"You'll be questioned. Oh, not like that. Varsek reserves the pit for
special cases. By our Intelligence group, by subterfuge--the captives'
quarters are thoroughly monitored and don't forget it--and by Varsek
himself, probably. Don't antagonize him, Wyatt, or you could find
yourself in the pit at that."

They had come to a transverse corridor, and now Brinna gave him a
warning glance and said in a sharp impersonal tone, "That way." Her
hand was on the butt of her stunner.

Wyatt turned obediently, into the transverse corridor. A guard who
had been lounging midway of it snapped to attention. He was stationed
beside a door. Brinna marched Wyatt up to him and said, "Another one
for the tank," and the guard said, "Yes, sir." He did a complicated
series of things with his hands, apparently activating power sources
that released various locks, and the door opened.

"Inside," the guard said to Wyatt, and jerked his thumb.

With no further word to Brinna, Wyatt stepped through the door.

It closed behind him with the sound of a bank vault shutting for the
night.

The room he stood in was fairly large and it had bunks all around the
walls. About sixteen bunks, Wyatt thought, and there were about a dozen
men sitting on the edges of them, or sitting around a table bolted to
the floor in the center of the room. They were all looking at him.
They were the damnedest collection of humanity, or whatever you wanted
to call it, that Wyatt had ever come across. He remembered Brinna's
complaint that the accessible people, the ones easily picked up without
giving any wide-spread alarm, usually lived in isolated regions and
were without much in the way of technical knowledge.

He could see the problem, all right. Of the five Earthmen there,
one was an Arab in a dirty burnoose, one looked like a young Apache
Indian in old farm clothes, and one, at a guess, came from Chinese
Turkestan and smelled of camels. The other two were closer to home.
One was medium-tall and stocky, with a thick chest and thin strong
legs. He wore faded Levis and high-heeled boots and his face was
burned brick-red to the middle of his forehead. Above that his skin
was as white as a baby's. A Stetson hat hung on a peg over his bunk.
The fifth man, who sat beside him, was cut out of the same cloth, but
somehow with a difference. Wyatt was puzzled for a minute, and then he
remembered once seeing an Australian movie with a long lean leathery
actor named Chips Rafferty in it playing a stockman, and he thought he
had the answer.

The other six men in the room were not from Earth.

The other six men in the room were not human.

Not as Wyatt was used to thinking of human, homo sapiens, tracing a
well-fossilized descent back through the various _anthropus_ forms
and ultimately to the primal ancestor. These six walked erect and had
facile hands and humanoid bodies and quite handsome faces, but whatever
their primal ancestor had been it had not been like man's. It had left
them a legacy of body hair that could not be called anything else but
fur, and their skulls were curiously elongated rather than domed, and
their finger-tips still had their ancient claws, retracting catlike
into the flesh. Catlike, Wyatt thought, was a good word for them--and
yet not quite Earthly-catlike. The ears were too round, the eyes too
large and dark and capable of warmth. They wore garments of fine cloth
in bright shades to set off their individual color, and in size and
facial conformation they were as different from each other as the
Earthmen were.

They looked at Wyatt, sitting in two double rows on the edges of their
bunks. The Earthmen looked at Wyatt. And in no eye, human or humanoid,
was there a spark of friendliness.

Wyatt said, "Hello."

There was no answer. The stocky man and the long lean one got up, and
each one hitched up his pants and left the thumbs of his hands sticking
negligently in the waistband.

"Look," said Wyatt, annoyed, "I didn't come here because I wanted to,
but I haven't got smallpox or whooping cough, and I haven't wronged
anyone's sister."

The two men began to walk slowly forward. The young Apache rose and
came after them, a dark gleam flickering deep in his eyes. The Arab
rose, and then the Turcoman, and then the six lithe furry men came
dropping one by one from the edges of their bunks and all of them moved
toward Wyatt, not speaking.

A cold qualm of fear contracted his heart. He set his back against the
door and braced himself.

"What is this?" he said. "What are you doing? I'm an Earthman, a
captive like you. Why--"

"You're no Earthman," said the stocky southwesterner, in a very cold,
mild voice. "You're another goddamn lousy spy."

They came at him all together in a swift purposeful rush.




                              CHAPTER VI


Instead of cowering against the door or trying to get out, as they
expected him to do, Wyatt sprang straight for the man in the Levis. He
was easy to get at because he was leading the others by a pace or so.
Wyatt hit him.

"Spy, am I?" he snarled. He was mad. The rush closed around him but he
hung onto the man, who snorted and grappled with him, and they toppled
over thrashing and kicking among the legs of the others. "I'll show you
who's a spy," he said. The tall man he took to be an Australian bent
over and started to pull at him, and he kicked him furiously on the
shins. "One at a time, boy. Keep your paws off." He rolled with his
enemy, pounding on a cast-iron body and getting knocked dizzy himself
in return. He began to swear. He had never been much for swearing,
but the injustice of this attack inspired him beyond his talents. He
went on pounding and cursing until after a while he realized that his
target was no longer in range and that he was alone in a small circle,
surrounded by the others who were looking down at him. He crouched
there, blinking, and saw the man in the Levis wiping blood off his
mouth with the back of his hand and studying him speculatively.

"So I'm a so-and-so saddle tramp, am I?" he said.

"Yes, and a damn dumb one," said Wyatt bitterly. He got up, bunching
his fists.

"Real fast now," said the stockman, "who was it died at the Alamo?"

"Davy Crockett," said Wyatt. "King of the wild frontier. Also William
Barret Travis and Jim Bowie and a lot of other good men who never had
songs written about them. Come on, let's finish this."

"No," said the other man, stepping back. "I don't reckon anybody but an
Earthman could swear like that without stuttering, nor want to fight
like that. What would you say, Bill?"

The Australian said he agreed.

"My name's A. C. Burdick," said the stockman, holding out his hand,
"and I'm a long way from home. Sorry about jumping you like that, but
we've had three guys in a row claiming to be captives like us, only
they weren't, and we're getting sick of it."

Still glowering, Wyatt shook hands with him, and then with the
Australian. The Arab and the Turcoman muttered and returned sulkily to
their places, apparently disappointed that there had been no bloodshed.
The Apache youth stood and regarded Wyatt with an unwinking stare from
under his greasy hatbrim.

"This here is No-Name," said Burdick, grinning. "He was sleeping out
in the hills when he was picked up--you know, some of them still find
out their warrior-name by getting it in a dream the old way. He figures
this is all part of the dream and is waiting till he wakes up."

Wyatt nodded to No-Name, who inclined his head briefly and went back to
his bunk where he sat cross-legged, patiently brooding.

Burdick shifted from his native tongue to the language of Uryx and
said, "These gentlemen are from Alpha Centauri Four."

The furred slender men clasped their hands and raised them to their
breasts. One of them, who was jet black and dressed in a scarlet tunic,
said in the same tongue,

"I am Thurne of Obran, a king's messenger. I was taken as I crossed a
plain, carrying a message between kings. Now there will be war for all."

The others nodded sadly. Wyatt, all his anger forgotten now, said,
"Yes, and for my world too."

"Well," said Burdick, "come in and make yourself at home."

       *       *       *       *       *

The time that followed then was something of a nightmare to Wyatt,
not too protracted but intense. It was a strain watching his tongue
when he talked with the others, knowing that every word he said was
being listened to outside. The Arab, the Turcoman, and No-Name awaited
whatever thing might happen with their several brands of fatalism but
Burdick and the Australian had a clearer understanding of the situation
and were frantic to do something about it. He would have liked to offer
them a word of hope, but he did not dare to. For the Alpha Centaurians,
Wyatt knew, there was no hope, and they knew it too. With each passing
hour, as the fleet roared on its way, Wyatt wished more earnestly for
something evil and permanent to happen to Varsek.

It didn't. The only thing that happened was that Wyatt was hauled out
away from the others at frequent intervals and questioned, questioned,
questioned until he was too dazed and tired to form words any more. He
tried not to tell them anything at all, but they were experts, and he
suspected that they learned almost as much, if not more, from what he
refused to tell them as from what he did. His only comfort was that
he had no knowledge of armaments or defense beyond what any ordinary
citizen might read in the papers, and which Fleet Intelligence had
doubtless also read.

He sweated through it the best way he could and waited for word from
Brinna.

It did not come.

Makvern came instead. He said, "Varsek wants to see you."

Wyatt went with him and they walked briskly through the corridors.

"What does he want with me?" Wyatt asked.

"You'll have to ask him," Makvern said.

"Did Loran die?"

"Yes. He died."

"Did he talk?"

"No."

"Then the Second Party's still safe."

"For the time being," said Makvern. "Only for the time being." He would
not turn to look at Wyatt. His profile was as expressionless as a
king's head on a coin.

Wyatt hesitated while he took three steps, knowing that if he guessed
wrong he would almost certainly wind up in the pit, and that Earth
quite certainly would be worse off than ever. Then, considering what
he had to gain if he guessed right, he plunged.

"The Second Party," he said, "could take over if Varsek had a serious
setback at Earth. Then they could take the Task Force and go home. They
could start exporting some things from Uryx, like peace and stable
government, instead of importing nothing but loot."

Makvern continued to walk briskly, looking neither to the right nor to
the left.

"How would you propose that Earth could give Varsek a setback?" he
asked.

"Get some of us back to Earth before the fleet, to give warning."

"That kind of talk," said Makvern evenly, "could get you and possibly a
number of other people killed. I suggest that you stop it."

His tone was hard, perfectly cold and inflexible. Wyatt's heart sank.
He had guessed wrong and Makvern was not one of the underground. And
yet he had been so sure, the way Makvern had looked when Loran was
suffering in the pit--

An orderly passed them into a huge room that was obviously used as an
outer office, full of communic equipment, recorders, electronic files,
and busy men. A second orderly opened the inner door for them, and
Wyatt found himself looking at Varsek as he had first seen him on the
communic screen, sitting behind the big crowded desk with his shirt
open and his sleeves rolled up, the picture of demon energy.

       *       *       *       *       *

He nodded and Makvern stepped back a little, leaving Wyatt alone, as it
were, before Varsek. Varsek picked up a report and shook it at him.

"This is from Intelligence," he said. "It's not satisfactory. You're
not cooperating, Wyatt."

"Would you expect me to?" said Wyatt.

"I expect you not to be a fool," said Varsek. "Look, I'm going to loot
your planet. You know that, don't you? All right. Now if I know where
things are I won't have to smash a lot of other things trying to find
them, will I? And if there's no attempt at resistance, then nobody will
get hurt, will they?" He threw the report. "You're not helping Earth,
you're making it harder."

"I told everybody in the beginning," said Wyatt sullenly, "that I don't
know anything more than they can find out themselves from reading a
popular magazine."

"You're a native. You know more about it than we could ever find out in
the time we have, and you have a scientific background. You must know
approximately where the largest uranium deposits are, for instance, and
the main sources of radioactive isotopes. Yet you refuse to verify our
information, or correct it if it's wrong."

"That's right," said Wyatt. "I do refuse."

"Brave and stubborn," Varsek said. "Well. I know how stubborn you are.
I could find out very quickly about the bravery."

"In the pit?"

Varsek nodded. "What would you say, Makvern?"

"It's up to you, sir," Makvern said, shrugging.

"No opinion at all?"

"None."

"That's not like you, Makvern."

"It's impossible to have any opinion of value concerning the
advisability of--ah--questioning a man I don't know at all. I have
no idea of his limits. If they're easily reached, fine. If not, he's
likely to die before you know it."

"True," said Varsek. "True. And he's the best bet to transmit a
convincing message to Earth when the time comes, assuring them of the
futility of resistance." He leaned back in his chair and scratched
his chest reflectively, studying Wyatt with his bright cold eyes, and
Wyatt had an uneasy feeling that Varsek was thinking rapidly of a great
number of things only remotely connected with him except that they
might have an indirect bearing on his life or death.

"Well," said Varsek finally, "there's always time for the pit later on.
We'll follow the customary procedure. Arrange for Wyatt and the other
Earthmen to have a good clear view of what happens when we hit Alpha
Centauri Four, which will be--" He frowned at a desk chrono. "--in
approximately five hours. I want you to watch carefully, Wyatt. This
world isn't as mechanized as parts of yours and it doesn't have nuclear
power, but it's civilized. Remember that. And remember that your
nuclear weapons wouldn't be much more effective against us than their
explosive devises."

He jerked his thumb at Makvern. "Get him out of here now. I've got half
the planning still to do for this campaign, without worrying about the
next one."

He became furiously busy. Makvern ushered Wyatt out and down the
corridors again. This time Wyatt did not speak at all, and neither did
Makvern. They parted at the door of the prisoners' quarters.

       *       *       *       *       *

The five hours seemed more like five centuries. The only chance for an
escape, Brinna had said, would be during the confusion of the attack.
He didn't know whether she had been able to arrange it at all, and if
she had, whether he might have made Makvern suspicious and ruined the
whole thing by his attempt to make a better deal for Earth through
the Second Party. He chewed his knuckles and sweated and thought wild
thoughts about escaping somehow on his own hook, but he couldn't plan
anything with Burdick and the Australian because it would be overheard,
or seen.

The other Earthmen were all restless and upset, as though they sensed
a coming crisis. The Alpha Centaurians waited quietly, by contrast.
Only their eyes shone with a terrible light. By God, thought Wyatt
furiously, I'll kill Varsek with my own hands if I have to, I swear it.
It was a childish thing to say even to himself, and he knew it. But he
had never meant anything so much.

The Task Force hurtled on, a school of killer whales racing toward an
unsuspecting victim.

The door opened and Brinna stood there. There were guards behind her.
