
  [Illustration]

    =London:=
    HODDER AND STOUGHTON,
    27, PATERNOSTER ROW, E.C.
    MDCCCLXX.

  [Illustration:

    UNWIN BROTHERS, PRINTERS,
    BUCKLERSBURY, AND CANNON ST. E.C.
]




                            ADVERTISEMENT.


The object of my former volumes upon the Ecclesiastical History of
England was to state facts and to draw conclusions, without seeking to
gratify any particular party, and by such a method to promote the cause
of Christian truth and charity. Acknowledgments of success to some
extent, expressed by public critics, and by private friends, holding
very different ecclesiastical opinions, encourage me to proceed in my
arduous but agreeable task; and I now venture to lay before the public
another instalment of my work.

To account for its appearance so soon after its predecessor, it
is but fair to my readers and myself to state, that it became the
dream and desire of my life, a quarter of a century ago, to write an
Ecclesiastical History of my own country; and that, ever since, my
reading and my reflections have been directed very much into this
channel. For many years past, I have been engaged in studying the
affairs of the Church from the Commonwealth to the Revolution; and
therefore, whatever may be the imperfections of these volumes, they
are not, at any rate, a hasty compilation, but the result of long and
laborious research.

It may be well to indicate the sources from which my materials are
drawn.

The printed _Journals_ of the Lords and Commons,--the _Parliamentary
History of England_,--_Cardwell's Synodalia_,--_Thurloe's State
Papers_,--and other similar collections, which did not exist in the
days of Kennet, Collier, and Neal,--supply, together with Burnet's
and Baxter's contemporary accounts, the backbone of the following
narrative. Journals, diaries, and biographies of the period, with
newspapers and tracts, of which extraordinarily rich collections are
found in the British Museum and in Dr. Williams' Library, have helped
to clothe the skeleton. But the sources of illustration, upon which I
rest some slight claim to originality, are found in certain unpublished
MSS. which it has been my privilege to examine and employ.

I. Amongst these the first place belongs to the _Collection of Papers
in the Record Office_. Besides the assistance furnished by the
published calendars of Mrs. Green, extending from 1660 to 1667, I have
been favoured with the use of that lady's unpublished notes down to
the close of 1669; these helps have greatly facilitated my inquiries
into the history of the first decade embraced within these volumes.
From that period to the Revolution, I have been left with no other clue
than the Office catalogue of the books and bundles chronologically
arranged; and all the documents which I could find bearing on domestic
affairs--and they amount to many hundreds--I have carefully examined.
Although those which relate to ecclesiastical matters are by no means
so numerous as those which relate to political, commercial, and other
subjects, they are of very great value to the Church historian. They
may be classified as follows:--

_As to the Established Church_--

     i. Note-book of Sir Joseph Williamson.

    ii. Applications for preferments, and correspondence relating to
          them.

   iii. Private letters alluding in various ways to Church
          affairs.

_As to Nonconformists_--

     i. Informations against them, which are very numerous.

    ii. A spy-book, containing many curious particulars of
          suspected persons.

   iii. Correspondence containing a great number of incidental
          allusions to the condition of Nonconformity.

The details are generally of a minute description, and would very
extensively serve the purpose of biographers and local historians; but
they are not without considerable value for a purpose like mine, as my
foot-notes will testify.

Amongst the new historical illustrations thus afforded, are those
connected with the ecclesiastical aspects of the general election of
1661, with the rumoured plots of that and succeeding years, plots in
which Nonconformists were accused of being involved,--the conduct
of Nonconformists under their persecutions,--and the fabrication of
letters with the view of involving Nonconformists in trouble--of which
one striking example occurs in relation to William Baffin, and, as
appears very probable, another referring to certain London ministers.
There are also notices of the Indulgence of 1672, and of the case of
Colledge, the Protestant Joiner, as he was called. It is apparent how
much the antipathies of the two religious parties of that day were
augmented by political considerations; and from the documents are also
obtained many interesting and amusing glimpses of private social life.

II. Next to the State Papers, I may mention a collection of fragmentary
remains in the _Archives of Parliament_, connected with the passing
of the Act of Uniformity,--and especially the Book of Common Prayer
attached to the Act (described in my Appendix), prefixed to which is an
Analysis of the alterations made in the formularies. Accurate copies
of these papers have been furnished for my use by the kindness of Sir
Denis Le Marchant.

III. _The well-known MS. Collections in the British Museum and at
Lambeth._ They have yielded items of information I believe not
published before--particularly the returns made to Episcopal inquiries
as preserved in the Archiepiscopal Library.

IV. _The MSS. in the University Library of Cambridge._ I have found
amongst these some papers which have been of service, especially in
relation to the reign of James II.; one of them, giving an account of
the opening of Parliament, I have printed in my Appendix.

V. _The Morice and other MSS. in Dr. Williams' Library._ This
collection forms a quarry hitherto imperfectly worked. There are three
folio volumes, entitled, _Entering Books, or Historical Register_,
extending over the period between 1676-91. These I have found of great
service in throwing light upon Nonconformist opinions of public events,
in supplying the current rumours of the day, and in recording pieces
of information relating to minor matters illustrative of those times.
And here I may add, not only with regard to this and other diaries, but
also with reference to letters and notes amongst the State Papers, that
I have relied on them only for such purposes as are now indicated, and
that I do not rest my belief of any important historical events simply
upon evidence of this description.

VI. _A curious Diary_, kept at the time of the Restoration, for the
loan of which some years ago I was indebted to Mrs. Green, who copied
it from the original in the Middleshill Collection. I have called it
the _Worcester MSS._ The diarist was Henry Townshend, Esquire, of
Elmley Lovet, Worcestershire, who lies buried in the church of that
parish; and the nature of his impressions of what went on around him
may be inferred from his epitaph.

VII. _A document relative to the death of Charles II._, being one of
the valuable collection of papers entrusted to the Record Commission
for examination. This document solves the curious enigma which puzzled
Lord Macaulay. For a copy of it I am indebted to the kindness of Sir
Thomas Duffus Hardy, who takes an important part in the Commission.

VIII. _A MS. History of the Congregational Churches of Suffolk_, by
the Rev. Thomas Harmer, Author of _Observations on Scripture; a MS.
History of the Congregational Church at Yarmouth_, drawn up from the
Church Book by my late friend Mr. Joseph Davey; and other old _Church
Records_ which I have been permitted to inspect, as will appear from
the foot-notes to these volumes.

IX. _MS. Volumes and Papers in the Archives of Canterbury._ For
the inspection and use of these I am indebted to the kindness and
assistance of the Dean and of Canon Robertson.

X. _Subscription Book_, amongst the records of Chichester Cathedral,
which has been examined by Canon Swainson, who has furnished me with
the results inserted in the Appendix. To him my best thanks are due;
nor can I omit to record my acknowledgments to the Dean of Chichester
also, for all his kind and friendly attention.

With these various materials before me, I have entered much more fully
than previous historians have done into several subjects--especially
the re-establishment of the Episcopal Church by the Act of Uniformity.
In our time, when the question of Establishments has been so
earnestly and so practically taken up, as to work out already the
greatest ecclesiastical change since 1662, surely a full account of
what was accomplished in that memorable year, with its immediate
results,--results far from having spent their influence,--must be
reckoned amongst the most desirable portions of history. It is
remarkable that no State Churchman has ever gone at large into this
subject, supplying the defects of Neal, and correcting the inaccuracies
of Clarendon and Burnet. Whilst I have attempted to supply the
acknowledged desideratum from my own point of view, it has been my aim,
in these as in former volumes, to make my readers acquainted not only
with prominent transactions, but with the social and private religious
life of the period, the personal piety which existed in different
communions, and the identity of that spiritual life which then deeply
struck its roots, as it ever does, under varied forms of doctrinal
belief, of Christian worship, and of ecclesiastical government.

I have also attempted to redeem my promise to furnish a sketch of the
theological opinions entertained in England between the commencement
of the Civil Wars and the fall of James II. It would have been easier
and more attractive to indulge in broad generalizations on the subject,
and to work out my own theological conclusions, through the medium
of historical reflection and argument; but I have preferred the more
useful and trustworthy, as well as the more humble and laborious
method of analyzing and describing the publications of the period in
connection with the authors, and thus indicating some of the extraneous
influences which have wrought upon the minds of eminent thinkers.
Of course I have been compelled to limit myself to those writers
who are best known and most significant, and therefore the student
will perhaps miss in my account some favourite or expected name. But
imperfect as the review will be found, enough will appear to indicate
strong resemblances between currents of opinion then and now; and in
this respect, the true apprehension of the present will be materially
assisted by a knowledge of the past.

As in the course of my researches I have detected in authors of the
highest reputation a number of minute inaccuracies, and some important
errors, I cannot hope to have escaped such evils myself, and I shall be
very thankful to candid critics for kindly pointing them out.

About one half of this volume covers ground traversed by me in _Church
and State two hundred years ago_, published in 1862: but it will be
found, that with the exception of a few sentences here and there, the
account now published is quite new. Facts before passed over are here
described at length, whilst certain trivial details are omitted; my
views on some points have undergone a little modification, and the
entire narrative has been rearranged; but the spirit which I sought at
the beginning I have endeavoured to retain throughout.

It would be ungrateful not to add, that for facilities in research, and
for direct literary aid, I am indebted to many friends. Besides special
obligations which I have acknowledged in the foot-notes and Appendix,
I beg to acknowledge the kindness of Mr. Thoms, Sub-Librarian to
the House of Lords--Mr. Aldis Wright, Librarian of Trinity College,
Cambridge--Mr. Bullen, of the British Museum--and Mr. Hunter, keeper of
Dr. Williams' Library.

Nor can I omit to mention again, my fellow-workers at home, especially
one whose assiduity and care in helping me to correct the press,
deserve the highest praise.

Two literary friends who took much interest in this work,--the Rev.
Joseph Aspland and Mr. John Bruce, F.S.A.,--are now, alas, beyond the
reach of my thanks.

Should my life be spared, I hope in another volume to bring the
Ecclesiastical History down to the Revolution. A history of the
eighteenth century lies amongst the visions of the future.
