“Oh, yes, you told me, sure enough,” said Matilda, with a little
impatience, “three times over;” and she got up to put away the seventh
chemise along with the others. It was trimmed with her own work, nice
little scallops worked in buttonhole stitch, with three holes in each
curve, very neat and strong; and she was pleased, at once with the
feeling of successful production and personal property. She gave the
little heap another affectionate pat as she laid this one on the top.
Seven new chemises, every stitch of which would bear inspection! Matilda
felt that she had justification for a little pride. She did not sit down
again to begin another, but put on the kettle, that it might come to the
point of perfect boiling before she made the tea; and it was pleasant
to see her moving about in the pleasant firelight, her substantial and
round, but neat person, clothed in a black and white gown, her brown
hair smooth and shining. Matilda was very particular about the due
amount of crape on her Sunday dress, and you may be sure would not put
off her mourning a day sooner than the most rigid rule allowed. But in
the house, with all her little domestic occupations, she thought the
black and white best. “For crape goes if you look at it, and black so
soon gets rusty,” she said. It looked more natural, as well as more
cheerful and pleasant that the fire should have something to brighten
upon and throw ruddy tints over; and it was comfortable to see her make
the tea. What a lucky New Zealander that man would be who got Matilda,
with all her nicely trimmed chemises, for his wife!

But with Nancy, poor Nancy! it was altogether another affair. It is a
rash thing to come out of the world in which you were born. She had done
it unintentionally, vowing with vehement asserverations that nothing
would change her. And how she had struggled against all poor Arthur’s
attempts! how she had clung, as it were, with clutching of desperate
hands to the fabric of her original home! Those very corrections which
she made in Matilda’s honest diction, had she not hotly resented them,
fiercely refused them when Arthur had tried to suggest them to herself?
But all that was changed. Nancy had drifted away from her own
world--drifted into his; if she clutched at anything now, it was not at
her old ark, but at the slippery rocks and sands of the other hemisphere
on which she had been cast ashore. Falling upon it in her first footing,
she had secretly kissed the soil as conquering invaders have done to
avert the evil omen. She belonged no longer to that old universe which
had been buried with the father and mother, the last lingering traces of
which were to be carried away in Matilda’s trunks along with her careful
outfit; but the other world had not yet received the trembling unavowed
neophyte. Even now, rather than be brought into it by any formal force,
by sense of duty, by the necessity laid upon her husband and his family,
or by their pity, or by anything that could be construed into either,
Nancy would have kept her wild word, and rushed away into the distant
wilds with her sister. Had there been a word, or thought, of
“arrangement,” of negotiation, even of right on the other side to claim
her, or of right on her side to a certain place as Arthur’s wife, no
request, no persuasion would have induced Nancy to accept what was thus
settled for her. She did not even know what she would accept as a
solution of the difficulty--even Arthur, did he stand before holding out
his arms to her, might by some chance glance, some inadvertent word,
turn her from him instead of bringing her to him. Her mind was still
high-fantastical, though changed in so many other ways. But all that had
happened since she came to Oakley had chimed in with her humour. The
advances she had made in knowledge of her husband’s surroundings, and
in the favour of his family had been of a kind that pleased and
flattered her. The Curtises had been aware of no reason for modifying
their criticism of her, or pretending to a liking they did not feel; but
they had all “taken to” Nancy; and Lady Curtis had called her “my dear!”
How haughtily would she have rejected that expression of kindness had it
been applied to Arthur’s wife in the old days; but as given to the young
stranger at Oakley, whose looks and ways had attracted my Lady, it was
sweet. Yes! she had attracted them, she herself, not anything outside of
her. Lucy--Lucy, indeed, had made doubtful response; but Sir John had
“raved about her,” and Lady Curtis called her my dear! These thoughts
made Nancy’s countenance glow.

And the three intervening days passed quickly in the excitement that
possessed her; everybody seemed to know that she was going to the Hall
on Saturday. The Doctor’s wife, who had kept aloof “till she saw what
other people were going to do,” called at the door in her husband’s
phaeton, and left a stately card, which seemed to Matilda, when it was
brought to her, much more impressive than Lady Curtis’s. And kind Mrs.
Rolt ran over twice a day at least, and asked what she was going to
wear. “If it is wet, Sam shall drive you there, before he goes to
Oakenden,” she said. She was as fussy about it as if Lady Curtis had
been the Queen; and, indeed, she was the Queen of the district, and made
the laws for the neighbourhood.

“You will have everybody coming to see you now,” said Cousin Julia.
“When Lady Curtis calls on anyone, everybody goes. Yes, it is silly
perhaps; but then we think a great deal of Lady Curtis, my dear. She is
very amiable, and so clever. Did you ever hear that she sometimes writes
for the Reviews? She does indeed; and one must have real genius, you
know, to do that; not like little bits of newspapers. And people must
have some sort of rule--some will not call unless they have an
introduction, and some will call on everybody. But we make Lady Curtis
our rule. If she goes, we all go.”

“You did not wait till Lady Curtis came,” said Nancy gratefully.

“Oh, no! I don’t think I could have done it. I fell in love with you the
first time I saw you my dear. I told Lucy of it directly. _So_ pretty, I
said, (as you are, though people don’t generally say it to your face
like me), and quite a lady. ‘Then, of course you should call. I wonder
you did not call instantly,’ said Lucy; and I did not lose much time,
did I, Mrs. Arthur? Then, of course, I was dying to know who you were.”

“You are very--very kind; but how could you know who I am? I am nobody,”
said Nancy with a smile; and then she added impulsively, “but I am so
glad you thought me--a lady.” When these unadvised words were out of her
mouth, Nancy changed colour, and grew defiant. But her horror at her own
mistake was entirely turned away by Cousin Julia’s soft disposition,
which was well fitted to be a buckler against wrath.

“As if there could be any doubt of that!” she said, “Lady Curtis says
you have such pretty manners, and Sir John! Sir John is really not
himself. He thought you must be young Seymour’s wife, whom I was telling
you of, who made such an admirable marriage. He married one of the
Glencoe family, quite a near relative of the Earl, the most
unexceptionable delightful match. How we all thought of poor Arthur when
young Seymour was married! But I told Sir John (now you must not be
vain, my dear, but of course one must say what one thinks) I told Sir
John you were a great deal prettier than Mrs. Henry Seymour; not quite
so tall perhaps, but _much_ prettier. What is the matter, my dear, you
turn white and you turn red?”

Here Nancy confounded her sister, who was present, and bewildered
herself, and won Mrs. Rolt’s tenderest sympathies by telling the merest
simple truth. “When you speak of Arthur,” she said, “you make me think
of my husband; and--I can’t help it!” she said, putting her head down on
Cousin Julia’s kind shoulder and bursting into a passion of tears. How
touched and interested and gratified that good woman was! She insisted
on taking Nancy upstairs and making her lie down for a little. “You poor
dear child!” she said, longing to ask a thousand questions, but
heroically refraining; “but you must rest a little, and get back your
pretty looks. You must not look pale to-morrow. I want you to look your
best to-morrow.” But when she came down stairs again, it was not in
human nature not to make an effort to get something out of Matilda. “She
never said anything to me about her husband before,” said Mrs. Rolt. “It
would do her good to talk a little, not to shut up everything in her own
heart, poor dear. Is it long since?” she asked delicately. She did not
know what it was, whether death or separation. The question had to be
put vaguely, and Cousin Julia had a consciousness that she had put it in
a very successful way.

“She will tell you herself,” said Matilda. “She does not like other
people to talk about it,” and she opened the door with great alacrity
that the visitor might go away.




CHAPTER XIV.


Arthur went to Durant’s chambers again next morning, with a forlorn hope
that something or other might have brought his friend back, without
whom, it appeared to him, that he did not know what measures to take.
Durant had held the keys of his fortune one way or another, and could
guide him with the right thing to do, the right way to set about
everything. He had never doubted that Durant would be in town, and would
help him, and the first sensation in his mind was one of irritation
mingled with disappointment. Of course, the only thing to be done,
failing Durant, was to go to Underhayes, where he knew his friend had
already gone without success. But what else was there to do, what other
clew was there? At the great railway-station, where he got the train to
Underhayes, it was his bad fortune to meet again with Denham, whom he
had seen not very long ago in Vienna. Arthur gnashed his teeth at sight
of this butterfly fluttering in his way again, no doubt to disturb his
mind with some foolish buzz or other--and did his best to avoid him; but
he was not a man to be avoided. He came forward with all his usual
warmth of friendliness and surprise to see the other in England.

“You here, Curtis!” he said.

“You always say, ‘you here,’ whenever we meet,” said Arthur,
half-annoyed, half-amused, remembering so clearly the greeting which
this man had given him at Paris, in the Bois. Denham was the first of
his own world whom Nancy had met, and how many little mistakes and
disagreements, quarrels which looked so ridiculously causeless at this
distance, which might have been so easily avoided, yet which raised such
rapid pulses then in their foolish young bosoms--had arisen while they
were meeting him, going to the theatre with him, or resisting his
invitations; for after all he had always been friendly, and had tried to
please the bride, hard though she was to please.

“Yes, you always turn up so unexpectedly, just when one thinks you a
hundred miles off. The other day you were in Vienna, and you said
nothing of coming here.”

“And you were the other day in Vienna, and said nothing of coming here.”

“Of course, we are both the Queen’s servants,” said Denham; “and public
business, eh? consumes a great deal of our time. But do you know,
Curtis, I wanted to see you. I hope I did not lead you into delusion? I
told you I thought I met Mrs. Curtis on the other side of the water.”

“Yes;” Arthur’s tone was curt and sharp; he had no intention of
listening to anything about Nancy, as if it was news to him, and yet he
knew so little, and would have been so thankful to hear anything from
anybody! His voice sounded harsh and peremptory in its agitation.

“Meaning no offence,” said Denham, with a scrap of mock humility; “but I
find I made a mistake. It was at one of the stations on this line I met
Mrs. Curtis, that was my blunder. I forgot till I came here to-day, when
it suddenly flashed across me, that it was here or somewhere near. I
hope I have not caused you any anxiety.”

“Not at all,” said Arthur, with a blank countenance, which his
diplomatic experience had taught him to wear when he chose; but then
Denham was a brother of the trade, and it was scarcely worth while
wasting it on him. “My--wife’s family lived near. It is very natural
that you should have met her hereabouts. I thought it a mistake, you may
remember.”

“Ah, did you? I did not recollect. I thought I might have been giving
you deluding information. I hope you have good reports?”

He did not know what to say. He was a dealer in gossip, and would have
given much to hear the full details of this separation, especially now
when he was on the verge of half-a-dozen country houses; but at the
same time he did not want to worry the man whom he was sorry for, by
betraying his partial knowledge of the facts. He had made a great deal
of Nancy in Paris, betraying her peculiarities, her ignorance to many
admiring listeners, and he would have liked a second chapter, which
probably would have amused society still more. But he did not want to
affront Arthur or wound his feelings. What could he say? ought he to
make believe that he had never heard anything? or delicately that there
was a something, a mist of report, which he knew?

“Perfectly,” said Arthur, with cold self-restraint. “I am going to her
now. Her mother, to whom she was much attached, is lately dead.”

“Oh, really!” said Denham; and he watched the young man’s face with keen
scrutiny. Fortunately, he himself was not going by the train which went
to Underhayes. He accompanied Arthur to the door of his carriage, and
stood there talking. “My _hommages_ to Mrs. Curtis,” he said, “I
daresay she has forgotten me; but lay me at her feet, Curtis, all the
same. One does not easily forget a face like hers; you won’t mind me
saying so much?”

“Oh no--surely not;” said Arthur, smiling. He put himself into a corner
of the train, glad to escape the other’s eyes. No, there were not many
such faces as hers. Then, all suddenly, her aspect as she sat in the
little Victoria in the Bois, that cold bright winter day, came up before
him, he could not tell how; how bright she had looked! no wonder that
Denham said one did not easily forget such a face. Her husband had been
trying to forget it for two years, and now, the moment he had suspended
that effort, how it came back! And where was she, where was he to find
her? How slowly the train seemed to go! Might she be visible perhaps
somewhere on one of the crowded railway platforms which they passed,
where Denham had seen her? He gazed out anxiously whenever they stopped.
Why should it be Denham, Denham! who cared nothing about her, that had
seen her, and not Arthur, to whom such a meeting would have been new
life? This was what was called providential; but what strange
mistakes--mistakes that the poorest clerk in an office would be
discharged if he made--were set down to Providence. If _he_ had but met
her, and not Denham, what trouble might have been spared!

It was about noon when he reached Underhayes; and he went direct,
remembering what Durant had written, to the shop of Raisins, the grocer.
Sarah Jane was dusting her drawing-room, when her maid brought her word
that a gentleman wanted to see her. It was her pleasure, and not
necessity (she liked people to know this), that made her dust the
drawing-room herself. Servants were negligent, they chipped the china
ornaments, and were not half particular enough about the gilding; but
Sarah Jane had nearly completed this self-imposed task. She put down the
long feather brush which she had been using in a corner, and took off
her housemaid’s gloves.

“Show the gentleman in,” she said, with some grandeur; but when she saw
who it was, Sarah Jane screamed out with surprise and excitement.
“Arthur!” she cried. She was almost as much startled as if he had come
back from the dead.

“Where is Nancy?” he said. He had got into such a state of excitement
now that he forgot all preliminaries, and plunged at once into the
subject which interested himself.

“Nancy? Oh, Arthur, wait a bit, I am so startled. You made my heart
jump! Whoever thought of seeing you here?”

“It is not so very wonderful to see me when you reflect that my wife has
been here for years. Where is she? You used to be kind and sympathetic,
Sarah Jane. Tell me where my wife is! Where is Nancy? There can be no
reason why I should not know.”

“Oh, it is so nice to see you again,” said Sarah Jane. “Such a long time
you have been away, two years and a half. It is a long time. Oh, how I
wish Nancy was here! I tried all I could to make her write to you when
poor mother died. But she was always so self-willed, you know.”

“Where is she?” said Arthur. He went up to Sarah Jane and grasped her by
the arm. He was beginning to lose the little self-control he had, and
his very eyes were dim with the heat of his excitement. It is impossible
to believe that he really hurt her, but it pleased her to assume that he
did, which came to much the same thing.

“Oh, you monster!” cried Sarah Jane. “Oh, you savage! If that is how you
used poor Nancy, I don’t wonder she wouldn’t take any notice. Let go, or
I’ll call my husband. Oh, my arm! I am sure it is black and blue.”

“Pardon me, pardon me!” said poor Arthur. “I did not mean to hurt you,
God knows; but I am almost out of my senses. My good girl, tell me where
she is. I have been travelling night and day. If I am impatient, you
must forgive me. Tell me, where is my wife?”

“Oh, Arthur, I am so sorry. I never thought you would take on so. Nancy
might be very proud if she saw you like that. I never thought a man
would mind so much, they take things so easy. Raisins never would. If I
were to go and leave him, I’m sure he’d let me. Oh, don’t you be afraid,
I ain’t so silly as to try.”

Arthur had to make a violent effort to restrain himself; but it was
clear she must be treated with in a more cunning way.

“Will you answer me a simple question? Do you know where Nancy is?” he
said; then with truer policy, “I will hear all about Raisins and
yourself after, and you must tell me what you will like for a wedding
present.”

“Oh, Arthur, how kind you are! I always said you were nice. Oh, anything
that _you_ like, I am sure! You would be sure to choose something
delightful; and we are brother and sister, ain’t we, Arthur? I must give
you a kiss to thank you,” said Sarah Jane.

There was no harm in the kiss, and Arthur accepted it meekly. He drew a
little further off when it was over, but took her hand and held it fast.

“All that afterwards,” he said. “You may be sure I will do all I can to
please you. But tell me first, tell me now, do you know where she is? I
must hear this first. You can’t tell me unless you know.”

“That is just it,” said Sarah Jane. “Of course, I should have told you
directly. They promised to write, but they never wrote but once.”

“What does _they_ mean? Who was with her, and where was the letter
from?”

“Don’t hold me so fast, you frighten me,” cried Sarah Jane. “It was
Matilda that was with her. Charley has gone to New Zealand, and Matilda
is going after him; and Raisins and me, we don’t know whether we mayn’t
follow. Don’t crush my hand like that, Arthur, you hurt me. There was no
date to the letter. No, I can’t say that I expected to hear again just
yet; five weeks, it is not so very long.”

“And did not you want to write? You might have wished to see your sister
again.”

“In five weeks, and me married?” said Sarah Jane naïvely, “Oh, no; I
knew they’d write when they wanted me, and what should I want them for?
When you’re in trouble, it’s natural you should think of your friends;
but when you’re doing very nicely, and quite happy, what do you want
with them? But, Arthur, to show you I’m speaking true, I’ll fetch you
the letter, if you will let me go; and then if you can make anything out
of it--let me go, Arthur. I promise I’ll bring you the letter. Oh,
please, I can’t tell you any more. Let me go!”

When he did so, which he was half afraid of doing, she kept her word,
and produced out of a gay little desk, lined with red, a crumpled note,
with the marks of greasy fingers upon it, the sight of which gave
Arthur, poor fellow, a sickening sensation. Small feelings so mingle
with great that the thought that such a greasy scrap was a relic of his
wife gave him as distinct a pang as if some great disappointment had
happened to him. A lover, such as he felt himself still to be, ought to
have been ready to take to his lips or his heart the meanest message
that came from the beloved; but this gave him a feeling of disgust. And
yet how he loved Nancy, and how his heart struggled and throbbed at the
idea of finding some trace of her. It was at once a relief and a
terrible disappointment to find that the greasy letter was not from
Nancy at all, but from Matilda, though, as it was the fingers of Mr.
Raisins and the pocket of his bride which had produced the stains upon
the letter, Nancy’s own autograph might have been in precisely the same
condition, unprotected by the divinity that should hedge a woman
beloved.

“I don’t know where she means to settle, nor what we’re going to do,”
wrote Matilda. “She’s always the same hoity-toity creature as ever. She
talks about a house she has heard of somewhere right in the country. I
can’t tell you any more; but I’ll write again; and in the meantime
you’ll be glad to hear that I’ve got some very nice calico, and begun my
outfit.”

This was all.

“She _is_ so taken up about her outfit,” said Sarah Jane. “You would
think nobody had ever got such a thing before. But poor Matilda was
always old-maidish in her ways. Lord, Arthur! what’s the matter? Have
you found out anything? What a turn you did give me, to be sure!” cried
Sarah Jane.

It was something which gave Arthur “a turn” too, as far as that effect
can be produced upon a male subject. It was simply the postmark
“Oakenden” on the envelope of the letter. He had not seen it before, nor
looked for it, being too anxious for the information inside. It startled
him beyond measure now. “Oakenden!” he repeated to himself as in a
dream. Something more than chance, some design which he could not
fathom, some vague trembling of meaning not yet comprehensible, but
tending towards light, seemed to flicker through the word. It was the
post-town of _home_. He knew it as well as he knew the village at his
father’s park gates. What had taken her there of all places in the
world?

