When suddenly Durant’s news came into his life like a thunderbolt,
breaking the stagnation of the unwholesome air. This woman who belonged
to him was, like himself, alone in the world. The humble coterie which
she had preferred to him was broken up. All that she had loved and clung
to had gone from her. Perhaps she too might have felt, even before this,
the dreariness of that existence deprived of its closest tie, to which
she had condemned him; but at least she must feel it now. Everything had
gone from her, the shelter of her father’s house, the natural protection
and moral support which perhaps had kept her in her error; but which
must have failed her now along with everything else. The first feeling
in Arthur’s mind was a keen pity for Nancy. She had done him grievous
wrong, she had wasted all their mutual chances of happiness; but she was
young, inexperienced, foolish, a child playing with the most dangerous
elements, not knowing any better, and now the time had come when she
must bear the penalty too. But when he realized the results of the
misfortune that had befallen his wife, and heard that she had left
Underhayes and thrown up the allowance which he had been so much
surprised, and disappointed, and satisfied to find her accept at first,
Arthur’s heart swelled with a more generous, more happy sentiment than
had touched it for months before. Had not this been one of the things
which had disgusted him most with human nature, though he had never put
it into words? The thought that his wife when she left him, though she
would not accept love from him, would accept money, humiliating,
degrading thought! With a start and sudden thrill of recognition he
heard that she had thrown it aside now, and this one fact threw light to
him upon all that went before, and seemed to bring her back to him
cleared of a thousand misapprehensions. At last he recognised again his
Nancy, proud, rash, daring, imprudent, capable of any outburst of
passionate folly, but not of mercenary calculation or the prudence of a
deliberate bargain.

He saw it all now, he thought; and in his thoughts, did, could anyone
wonder? as much injustice to the poor vulgar couple in their graves,
who were not any more mercenary than poverty compelled them to be, as he
had formerly done to his hot-headed and foolish wife. It had been their
fault; they had forced her into this vulgar settlement which had so
revolted him, this compounding for the injuries of the heart by an
allowance. Had he not known all along that it could not be Nancy? What
could be more unlike Nancy, so independent, so defiant, so rash and
regardless of all dictates of prudence as she had been? It had been a
mystery to him, and burning pain all through; but now he recognised her
again. It was as if suddenly, after long obliteration from his memory,
her face with all the characteristic defects and imperfections of its
beauty, defects far more sweet than the faulty faultlessness of others,
had all at once gleamed upon him out of the gloom. Perhaps, how could he
tell, if he had been less distant, if she had been less proud, she might
have turned to him in her grief and loneliness, sought his natural
support, his natural consolation; but at least she had vindicated
herself by that hasty, foolish immediate action. If not love, then not
money, no bargain, no mercenary advantage. Through the gloom, through
the distance, flashing with anger, veiled with tears, Nancy’s eyes
seemed suddenly to gleam upon him, Nancy’s voice, faltering yet firm, to
fling at him a defiance, a challenge--was it an appeal? There came from
Arthur’s breast a sudden burst of cries and laughter mingled, and his
eyes in his solitude filled with tears, salt and scalding but sweet. And
as he sat there alone he blushed fiery red over brow and throat. To what
ignoble rivalship, what miserable partaking, had he almost degraded his
wife! but heaven be praised this voice out of the darkness had come in
time.

And at first it did not occur to him that this sudden and prompt
vindication of herself, which set Nancy right, brought external
consequences with it which might alarm any man. What could she do to
make up for the loss of her living which must ensue? She would be not
only an orphan and friendless--but also penniless, with nothing, and no
one to keep her from want. This is a thought which might well appal a
man used to all the resources of wealth, and who had no notion how poor
people contrive to stumble on, and keep body and soul together upon no
income at all. A shiver of pain got into Arthur’s being at thought of
the sacrifices and straits she might be driven to; though that was not
half so powerful at first as the relief and satisfaction of the other
discovery, that she was herself still, foolish, rash, passionate, but
not mercenary. It grew upon him, however, as the days went on, and no
answer came to the letter he wrote instantly imploring Durant (whose
time and labours seemed to his friends to belong to them) to lose no
time in finding Nancy. As it happened, and as it happens so often in the
emergencies of individual history, Arthur could not at that moment rush
home himself, as he would have done almost at any other time, to rescue
his wife from her self-imposed privations, whatever they might be. His
chiefs were absent, there was a lull in diplomatic business, and it was
his duty to remain at his post, to note the small gossip of the court,
and chronicle all the small beer, and make into national importance the
scraps of remark that fell from Count A. and Prince B.

For a month or more he was kept doing this, chafing at every day as it
passed, and growing more and more excited, more and more anxious. By and
by Durant wrote that he was making every possible research, but had as
yet discovered nothing. And then there arose a very fever of anxious
thought in Arthur’s mind. Where could she be? what might she be doing?
what privations might she be enduring, what toils, what hardships? All
the stories of distress he had ever heard, of proud poverty, of
struggles for employment, of Spartan independence starving calmly sooner
than ask for a morsel, all the taunts and spurns which patient merit
from the unworthy takes, came rushing upon his recollection. While he
lived daintily and slept softly, his Nancy, his wife, might be turning
away discouraged, penniless, without shelter, from some door which was
closed upon her. Heaven above! what could he do? He sent wild
advertisements to the “Times,” he wrote ceaseless letters to Durant.
Find her! was his cry; though indeed Nancy was spending her time, on the
whole, very comfortably, as the reader knows. But Arthur did not think
of the little fortune--the two hundred and fifty pounds which was to
have been handed over to her sisters. Nothing had been done about it,
and it had not found a place in his memory; he did not think of anything
reasonable, he only lost himself in a vague cloud of excitement, terror,
and anxiety, intensified by the fact that it was impossible for him to
get away, and to go in search of her himself. And his troubles were made
tenfold greater still by a chance meeting with his Paris friend, Denham,
who “thought he had seen” Mrs. Arthur Curtis somewhere, but could not
recollect where. Denham knew, as everybody did, that the husband and
wife were separated; and he was curious, and ventured upon some leading
question to which Arthur in his state of suspense fell a ready victim.
He did not conceal that he was anxious, “not having heard from his wife
for some time,” he allowed; and then Denham on his side recollected that
he had seen her somewhere; where was it he had seen her? Was it in
Paris, was it London? he had quite lately come from England; and he
could not recollect where it was--at a railway-station somewhere--but
where? The impression left upon Arthur’s mind was that she might be
coming to him, and this beguiled his anxiety for a few days, making him
tremble at every strange sound, and expect day and night her
arrival--which never came. This final trial made an end of him, poor
fellow! It ruined his chance of sleep, so that his nights and days alike
became torment to him. And the probation lasted for more than a month
after he had heard that Nancy had left Underhayes--a month--which felt
like a century. It was far on in November when at last he was released
from his post, and could start for home. For home! where was that, he
asked himself, sadly? could it now exist anywhere for him except where
she was, who was a part of him, who had no one now but himself, and who,
by rejecting that last material tie between them, had caught back the
sick heart which had begun to flutter downward. But never, never again
could he fall back into that disgusted and weary infidelity of thought.
All this time his pride and his reviving affection had kept him from
communicating his anxiety to his family. They did not know Nancy as he
did, they would not think of her as he did, that was certain. Their
pride would be hurt by the idea of poverty or distress falling upon her,
but not their hearts touched. If they should happen to hear of her as
labouring perhaps for daily bread, a poor needlewoman, a poorer teacher,
they would think of her not nobly, but ignobly, as driven to it by
folly, not forced by proud independence. He would not say anything to
them. He did not even let them know that he was coming back. Whether he
went to Oakley or not would depend upon many other things, and he was
full of the unconscious cruelty which springs from pre-occupation and
partial indifference. He did not think what would be the feelings of his
father and mother when they heard he was in England, but as much apart
from them as if he were still in Vienna. What were they in comparison
with Nancy? Nancy who was young, poor, lonely, without guardian or
helper. All the fathers and mothers in the world were nothing compared
with her. This is not a pleasant consideration for the fathers and
mothers; but yet it was true.

A few days were necessarily lost in travelling; and what so good as the
long compulsory seclusion of a railway carriage, shutting you absolutely
up with yourself, while the long lines of country, plain, and hill sweep
pass, and all the outside hurry and bustle do nothing but make the
whirling silence of the box in which you are enclosed more complete--for
the feeding of anxiety and cherishing of all troublous thoughts? The
mere certainty that he must not surrender himself to his fears had given
him a certain power of self-control so long as he remained at Vienna,
which now abandoned him altogether. His mind was in a fever by the time
he reached London. It was late at night, and the only thing he could do
was to throw himself into a cab and drive to Durant’s chambers in the
Temple, where, in all the commotion of his feverish thoughts, he was
brought to a sudden standstill by the information that Durant was out of
London, engaged on the business of the Commission on which he had been
appointed. He had not even heard of this commission; for Lewis had been
reluctant to write of the many events which had lately occurred, not
knowing what his friend might think of his own half-permitted betrothal,
or whether it was not best that Nancy should have an undisturbed moment
to make her way with the family at Oakley. This had kept Durant silent
for longer than was, perhaps, quite friendly; but, as fate would have
it, he had taken heart of grace at last, and had written to Arthur on
the very day on which Arthur had left Vienna; and the letter which would
have given so much information arrived in the one capital just as the
person to whom it was addressed reached the other. He was cruelly
disappointed by Durant’s absence. It seemed something like a crime in
the confusion of his thoughts. What was any public commission in the
world to the commission which affected his friend’s happiness, the
succour of a woman who was to that friend more than all the world
beside? Arthur could scarcely keep his patience even with the innocent
laundress who answered his questions. He went into his friend’s room,
and found there his own letter announcing his coming, which had arrived
only a few hours before him, and which he tore vehemently into a hundred
pieces. But all his rage and vehemence could do nothing for him. He was
obliged to go away, to go to an hotel, and in utter impossibility of
doing anything, to eat and to sleep, which, perhaps, saved him from a
fever. It was all that could be done that night.




CHAPTER XII.


To know something which those about you do not know--to keep something
secret which would interest them above measure, and affect their
conduct; but which you, in your superior wisdom, believe it better they
should not know--this is to play a very difficult part, one of the most
difficult in life. And if you undertake it without possessing the
necessary qualities of reticence and self-control, with, on the
contrary, all the habits of an innocent life, the traditions of family
frankness and inter-communication of everything, great or small; and if
to add to all these difficulties you have been in the habit of living
with one other close companion as if you and she had possessed between
you but one soul--it may be imagined how hard the task will be. This was
what Lucy Curtis had undertaken to do. She had no idea when she
undertook it how hard it was. In a glow of determined generosity and
good meaning towards the woman of whom, in her inmost soul, she felt
jealous as receiving regard and attention to which she had no right, she
had taken this Herculean task upon her shoulder--and now she would not
shrink from it; but it was hard beyond all belief to carry it out. A
hundred times a day the name of Nancy was trembling on her lips. Between
her mother and herself, the conversation was not talking so much as
thinking aloud. Everything was common between them, their thoughts, the
occurrences of their life, their reading, their speculations--they did
everything _à deux_, as even husband and wife cannot do, as perhaps only
mother and daughter ever succeed in doing. The differences of character
between them, the difference between Lady Curtis’s experience, and those
touches of the world which inevitably in nearly fifty years of living
modify the character, and Lucy’s youthfulness of certainty--her stronger
convictions and more absolute perceptions of good and evil--these gave
the necessary tinge of individuality to their utterances. But there had
never been any reserves between these two.

Thus when Lucy made up her mind to keep Durant’s intimation of Nancy’s
near presence, to herself, she undertook a burden for which her strength
was scarcely fit. To help herself to bear it, she said to herself, that
she had as yet no certainty on the subject--that she was not sure that
the woman Durant had seen was Mrs. Arthur; and that she herself having
once seen her brother’s wife did not recognise her now, though compelled
by a hundred circumstances to believe that this was she. No, she said to
herself, she had no legal warrant, no certainty sufficiently strong to
justify her in disturbing the minds of her parents by a guess which,
perhaps, might turn out mistaken. It would disturb their minds greatly.
Their kindly prepossession in favour of the stranger was not strong
enough to bear such an interruption, and they would be entirely at a
loss what to do; what Arthur would wish them to do; what would be most
expedient in the painful circumstances. If Nancy was known to be
Arthur’s wife, she could not remain there without acknowledgment from
Arthur’s family; and how could they adopt her into their bosom when it
was she who had separated from her husband, sent him away from her,
ruined his life? She could not be at variance with her husband, and in
friendship with his father and mother--parted from him, but received by
them. No, that was impossible; and when nobody even knew whether it was
Nancy! It might be quite another person whom Lewis had seen--it might be
some one from Oakenden, the nearest town, come over for the day. It
might be the clergyman’s wife of the next parish, young Mrs. Brown, who
was lately married and not much known in the neighbourhood. It might
be--half a dozen people--why should it be Mrs. Arthur of Wren Cottage?
If this were, indeed, Nancy, the wife of Arthur Curtis, was it at all
probable that she would have taken so transparent a disguise? All these
arguments Lucy went over to herself, feeling that they were futile. In
her own mind, she had no doubt that Mrs. Arthur at the Cottage was her
sister-in-law, and that Lewis had seen her, and that she had fled from
him. But these were simply ideas of her own, no more; and even if they
were facts, and proved true, what end could be served by telling her
mother--was it not better to wait, to see what might happen, to let
events shape themselves? But oh! how hard--how much harder than anyone
could have supposed it was!

Lady Curtis on her side was secretly grieved with her child. She did not
make any complaint; she reasoned with herself indeed against the pain
she felt, saying to herself that it was natural Lucy should be
preoccupied, should talk less freely when they sat together, should
have less to say to her mother. Had she not another now for whom she
would store up all those outflowings of the heart which had been her
mother’s alone? She was, she knew and humbly avowed to herself,
ridiculously ready to be wounded, and felt the smallest little
unconscious prick from those she loved; but she must be just to Lucy.
There was nothing wanting in Lucy that any reasonable mother could wish
for; but only they two had been all in all to each other, and Lady
Curtis felt that to Lucy she was no longer all in all. Long silences
would come between them while she worked at her crewels, and Lucy
carried on the varied occupations of a young lady’s afternoon, a young
lady who is a parish sovereign, and has a great many small yet important
public affairs on hand. Those silences Lady Curtis set down to Durant’s
account, and felt a something growing in her mind very different from
her former affection for Lewis, which she endeavoured with all her might
to crush, without finding it easy to do so. It was natural, and she
must be just; while all the time it was not Lewis that was in fault.
Fortunately, Lucy herself did not even know that her mother had
discovered her embarrassed self-consciousness, and had not the slightest
notion that it was set down to the account of Lewis. And thus a little
something, which was not so much as a cloud, a mist upon the clear sky,
a fantastic vapour, but presaging storm and darkness, began to breathe
between them. They were disappointed in each other; sympathy somehow
seemed to fail between them. Was it that her mother was _exigeante_,
Lucy asked herself--even--painful word--jealous? It was that Lucy had
some one else to love, that she was no longer of first importance to her
child, the mother thought; and the fact was that both were wrong, that
it was neither jealousy on the one side nor desertion on the other, but
Nancy--nothing but a secret, the most innocent of secrets, and the most
well-intentioned, that did the wrong.

And the more her thoughts dwelt on this subject, and the more apparent
it became to Lucy’s mind that she must not betray her discovery, the
more curious she grew about the object of it all. Never a parish day
came now that she did not pay a visit to Mrs. Arthur. This was not
always successful, for Mrs. Arthur was often out, as Lucy thought, to
avoid her; but on these occasions she would talk to the sister, whose
name nobody knew. Lucy called her Miss Arthur, with a keen glance of
scrutiny, and saw by Matilda’s little start and her sudden look, as if
about to contradict her, that this was not her name; but she thought
better of it after a moment’s consideration, and allowed herself to be
called Miss Arthur for the rest of the interview. And Lucy had little
difficulty in eliciting from Matilda all the particulars of her family
history which did not touch Nancy. How their parents were dead, how
their only brother had gone to New Zealand; and Matilda did not conceal
that she hoped to follow Charley, and, indeed, to that intention was
busy with all the chemises at which Lucy beheld her working.

“It will be a long voyage,” Matilda said, “and one requires a large
supply.”

“But will your sister go too?”

“My sister? I have two sisters, Miss Curtis. One is very well married in
the place where we used to live. I have heard them say that if Charley
did very well, and there seemed a good opening, they wouldn’t mind; for
what is New Zealand nowadays?--not much farther than France used to be,
father always liked to say.”

“But I meant your sister here, Mrs. Arthur. Will it not be very dreary
for her if you go away?”

“Oh, my sister, Mrs. Arthur! She is very different from the rest of us;
things are not with her as with the rest of us. I cannot take it upon me
to say what she will do.”

While this conversation was going on, Lady Curtis, who had walked down
the length of the avenue to look for Lucy, met Mrs. Arthur coming over
the stile, and stopped to talk to her.

“I see you have got some lovely leaves again; are you going to draw
them? You must have quite a genius for art-work.”

“Oh, no, no genius for anything,” said Nancy, with the swift flushes of
sudden change going over her face which Lady Curtis always called forth.
She was more at her ease when there was nobody looking on. She had the
feeling that she must be supposed to be “currying favour” with Lady
Curtis when there was a third person present. “No genius; it has been
always my ruin that I am so stupid,” said Nancy, with a serious air,
which looked very piquant and amusing in conjunction with such words.

“Your ruin, my dear? I hope you are far from ruin anyhow; and I don’t
think it could possibly come on that score,” said Lady Curtis, with a
smile.

“Ah!” said Nancy, with her whole heart in the sigh that came from her
red lips, “no one can tell another’s troubles. I have had many; but they
have all come because I was so stupid; though after I have said a wrong
thing, I always feel that it is wrong, and know what I ought to have
said; but it is too late then, it only makes it worse,” she breathed
forth with a long sighing breath.

“Well,” said Lady Curtis, still smiling, “I don’t know what wrong things
you may have done; but that is the best that can happen to you, for you
will remember next time to say, not the wrong thing, but the right.”

“Ah!” said Nancy again, with great serious eyes; “but that is exactly
what I cannot learn to do! It is not badness, it is stupidness. I make
the same mistakes, and do the same faults, and speak as I ought not to
speak.”

“Poor girl!” said Lady Curtis, touched by the tears that came while Mrs.
Arthur spoke. “This is a sad experience for you. I hope it is not so
serious as you seem to think. I am a great deal older than you are,” she
went on, still more touched as a big tear fell, locking like a small
ocean on Nancy’s black sleeve, “and if I can help you, or give you any
advice, I should be glad to do so. Our experience is not worth much
unless we can help younger people with it; and though I do not know you,
I take an interest in you.”

“Oh, you are kind, very kind,” cried Nancy, a brilliant flush darting
all over her face. “I never thought anyone could be so kind; but my
troubles are all of my own bringing on,” she added quickly; “and the
worst is, I can’t do anything. No, no one could do anything. Did you
mean really you would like the pattern?--those poor natural things?”
there was a wistful look in her eyes, but she tried to laugh, and shook
off the tears, “they don’t seem worth the attention of a lady like you.”

“I am afraid you are a little goose,” said Lady Curtis, patting Nancy’s
hand with her own. It was the only way she could show the sympathy which
rose so warmly within her, she could scarcely tell why. “Nature is as
much worth a queen’s attention as a beggar’s. And yes, indeed, I should
like the pattern. Will you really make it for me? But you must come to
the Hall and see my work; and Sir John wants very much to make your
acquaintance. It was you, was it not, that opened the gate for him?”

“Yes.” Another vivid flush covered Nancy’s face; she grew prettier and
prettier as she grew thus animated, wavering from one emotion to
another. This time it seemed all pleasure, warming her all over, and
making her countenance glow.

“He has done nothing but rave about you ever since. I shall be jealous
if you don’t mind. Will you come to-morrow?”

“Not to-morrow,” said Nancy, her face changing like a sunset sky. “Oh,
Lady Curtis, you are too good to me. You don’t know me--”

“No, not much; but everything must have a beginning,” said the gracious
lady. “We must settle upon a day. If not to-morrow, let it be Saturday.
That will give you four days to make up your mind. You must come up
early to luncheon, and Lucy and I will show you all there is to see. If
you meet Lucy, will you tell her I am going slowly up the avenue waiting
for her. She should be on her way home now.”

Nancy went away with her head full of excitement, and a hundred
conflicting thoughts. She met Lucy at the corner of the village street,
who looked at her with investigating eyes. Whom has she been talking to,
to make her look so bright, yet so agitated? Lucy asked herself. Surely
it could not be Bertie, who had passed but a little time before? The
jealousy of a tiger suddenly sprang up in Lucy’s mind. If this girl came
here to conciliate the family, yet under their very eyes looked like
_this_, because of the admiration of another man!

“Miss Curtis, I have just met----” (Nancy did not like to say “your
mother,” that seemed too familiar; and her ladyship, as Matilda said,
was too like a servant) “Lady Curtis. She said I was to tell you that
she was in the avenue waiting for you. She is very kind,” said Nancy,
with a little appealing look. “She said I was to come to the Hall. Does
she really mean me to come, Miss Curtis? You will tell me true.”

“Do you think my mother says what she does not mean?” cried Lucy,
herself half-touched, half-angry; for she felt now that she did not
want to like this girl, whose secret she alone knew--and yet there was
danger that she might be made to like her. The creature looked
beautiful, something had inspired her. She had never looked so nearly
beautiful before. “Of course she means you to come, what else could you
suppose?”

“I did not know that--people were so kind,” said Nancy, in a very low
tone. Then she looked at Lucy, half-wistful, half-suspicious. Lucy was
not like the rest, there was a mixture of feelings in her which did not
exist in the others, a complication of sentiment which Nancy divined,
though she could not have told how. “I will come if you say so,” she
said.

“Then come,” said Lucy, holding out her hand, with a sudden movement.
“And good-bye. I must run, if my mother is waiting for me--” She hurried
away for other reasons, too. It seemed to her as if she must say
something, disclose her knowledge, encourage Nancy to win the favour of
her father and mother if she lingered a moment longer. “Is it because
she is so pretty?” Lucy asked herself; “if I were a gentleman perhaps!”
As a matter-of-fact, women are absurdly subject to this spell of beauty;
but we have been taught to think that it is not so, and most people
believe as they are taught; so Lucy supposed it must have been something
else which moved her, and suddenly made her forget her prejudices. She
hurried on after her mother, who was still lingering in the avenue. It
was early afternoon still, but the short winter day was already waning.

“You are late,” Lady Curtis said, when she came up. “I thought, as it
gets dark so soon, I would come and meet you.” This was one of the many
little pathetic additions to her ordinary tender ways, which Lady Curtis
made, partially unawares, to conciliate her child.

“Thank you, mamma. I met Mrs. Arthur, and she told me you were here.”

“Yes, I met her, too; how pretty she is! and she made me such curious
pretty speeches. Is it humility, is it pride? I cannot understand. I
think that young woman must have a history.”

“I suppose most people have,” said Lucy.

“You know what I mean,” said Lady Curtis. “She took to telling me about
her faults, poor thing, _àpropos de bottes_. It was quite uncalled
for--but confidence, whoever it may be that gives it, is always
touching. I suppose it feels like a compliment. It is always
complimentary when people trust in you.” Here she gave her daughter’s
arm a little soft pressure. Lucy felt it, but misunderstood it, as was
natural. It felt the very softest tenderest of reproaches for something
withheld; but Lucy understood one thing and Lady Curtis meant quite
another. Therefore now they came to an understanding, though still a
mistaken one. “If I ever keep anything from you, mamma,” she cried, “it
is only because--because--”

“My darling,” said the mother, holding her child’s arm close within her
own. “Do you think I don’t understand?” and she gave a little sigh.

What was it she did or did not understand? Lucy was wholly puzzled; and
then they fell to talking of other things; of the parish, and how many
flannel-petticoats and pairs of blankets should be ordered for
Christmas; and about the little cookery school, which was Lucy’s present
hobby--how nicely Annie Bird, the model girl, made the soup for the
sick; and then changing from that--wondered when Arthur’s next letter
would come, and told each other that they did not like the tone of the
last one. Poor Arthur! would it be possible to have him home for
Christmas. Surely Lady Curtis said, he did not intend to stay
permanently out of England because of that dreadful wife of his. That
would be hard indeed upon his own family, who loved him. And thus they
beguiled the way up the darkling avenue, with their faces turned towards
the lights of home. Oh, if Arthur would only come home! There at least
he would find nothing but tenderness, not a word to cross him, poor
fellow! nothing to put him in mind of the wife who had made a waste and
wilderness of his life.

While her mother spoke so it may be supposed how Lucy trembled--so much
that at last Lady Curtis took note of it, and asked in some alarm what
was the matter, did she think she had taken cold? did she feel ill? No,
Lucy said, hurrying on, she had taken no cold; but she was chilly, she
had felt it all the afternoon; and then Lady Curtis hurried her into the
warm blaze of the morning room, and to the warm tea, which Sir John came
in to share, almost as soon as they got indoors. He thought it was very
cold, too, seasonable weather, such as ought, to herald Christmas; then
he heard the little budget of news. He was delighted to hear of Annie
Bird’s proficiency with the soup, and still more delighted that the lady
of the gate, the pretty stranger, was coming on Saturday. The one fact
was not much more important than the other in the old man’s eyes.




CHAPTER XIII.


Nancy went very quickly along the village street; the red brown leaves
were dropping from her hands; she had forgotten them; her mind was full
of excitement, and her eyes of light and life. If Arthur could have seen
her at that moment, he who was just now arriving in England, full of
anxious thoughts about her, thinking of her as perhaps in want,
certainly in poverty, struggling against adverse fate, he would scarcely
have known his wife. Never during all the time he had known her had
Nancy looked so brilliantly vigorous, and indeed happy. She was happy in
a way, happy in the stir of living that was in her mind, the sense of an
emergency that would call forth all her powers, and that potential
consciousness of active existence which is sometimes better even than
happiness. All her faculties were in vigorous exercise, her mind was
busy with plans and thoughts. She had that to encounter which might have
made the bravest woman in her circumstances quail; but it only strung
her nerves, and made her feel the strength within her tingling to her
very finger-points. Rash, impulsive, hot-headed she was, as she had
always been, but the jar and twist of unhappy pride, of false position,
of conscious ignorance and inferiority, and struggling self-assertion
were gone. She went rapidly up the village between the rows of cottages,
with their little lamps lighted, and past the glow which Mrs. Rolt’s
window threw out into the evening. The Rector and the Doctor were going
to dine with Cousin Julia that night, and the table was already laid,
and showed its modest grandeur frankly to the gazers outside, who
thought it very fine indeed. Mrs. Rolt had asked Nancy to that dinner,
and though she had declined to go she cast a glance through the wire
blinds at the lighted interior and the laid out table, with a pleasant
consciousness that she might have been there had she pleased. And then
she went across to the Wren Cottage, where Matilda, more careful than
Mrs. Rolt, had drawn down the blinds when she lit the lamp. She was
seated as usual at her chemises; but she was not so comfortable as
usual, for she had been beguiled into telling Miss Curtis a good deal
about the family, and had mentioned the name of Underhayes, and that of
Nancy--all things which in the code of private instructions drawn out
for her when she came here, were accounted capital crimes. But Matilda
did not feel that she was called upon to disclose these errors. She was,
however, “talkative and unconciliatory,” very willing to hear of the
encounters Nancy might have had, and to give an account, with reserves,
of her own. Nancy came in, opening the door which opened innocently from
the outside, as is the way in most country places. She threw herself
down in the first chair she came to, and put down her leaves (“nasty
wet rubbish, enough to give her her death of cold”) upon the table on
which Matilda already, though it was too early to have it, yet for the
sake of cheerfulness, had set out the tea. And then Nancy looked
straight into the lamp, with eyes that seemed to give out as much light,
so brilliant, so shining, that Matilda, though so familiar with them,
was struck with surprise.

“How can you stare into the light so, Nancy?” she said, “you will ruin
your eyes.”

“Shall I? it does not hurt them.”

“It is all very well to say that now; but wait till you are older.
Mother used to say there was nothing so bad. Ah, Nancy, you have taken
things into your own hands--dear old mother’s rules don’t count for much
now.”

“Indeed they do,” cried Nancy, with sudden tears; “indeed they do, and
will whatever happens! I am not unfaithful. Those that I love, if I love
them once, I love them for ever--dead or alive.”

“Ah!” said Matilda, with a tone of interrogation in her voice. It was
not clear what she was thinking of; but Nancy’s quick temper and
restless spirit divined at once.

“You mean Arthur? Well then, and I mean it too. All the same I do. I
mayn’t have just shown it--always: but I do mean it--and will, if I
should live a hundred years.”

“I wonder at you, Nancy! Why don’t you write then and tell him? I never
knew whether you did or didn’t till this moment--and it looked a great
deal more like didn’t. He thought so, I’m sure.”

“Could I give you the sense to see, either to him or you?” cried Nancy,
with quick scorn. She did not know that Dr. Johnson had declared it
impossible to furnish understanding. And then she threw up her arms with
a sudden fine gesture, tossing down the red brown winterly leaves, and
shaking the tea-table with its load. “Oh, what am I to do?” she cried,
“what am I to do? I am going to the Hall on Saturday; they want me to
go, they have all asked me to go; and Lady Curtis called me, my dear.
But she didn’t know who I was. And I am deceiving them, Matty. It is the
same as telling a lie. I have done a great many wicked things,” said
Nancy, “but I never told a lie. How am I to go and sit at their table,
and look in their faces, and all the time it will be a lie?”

“What will be a lie?” said sober-minded Matilda. “You don’t need to say
anything that isn’t true. It is not as if you had changed your name. You
are Mrs. Arthur, and you would be Mrs. Arthur whatever happened. I do
believe Miss Lucy suspects something; she has a way of taking things so
quietly as if nothing was new to her. And anyhow, if the very worst
should come to the worst, why, you’re not compelled to go.”

“But I will go,” said Nancy, with flashing eyes. “Oh, just to be there,
to see it all, to know just where he would have taken me, where I might
have lived if I hadn’t been a----. I will go! I have made up my mind to
that. She called me, my dear--did I tell you she called me my dear? and
said old Sir John had raved about me; and begged me to go.” The vivid
blush of pleasure came back to Nancy’s face as she spoke, and her eyes
again blazed, opposite the lamp, like rival yet reflecting lights. A
vague smile came upon her face; there was a little vanity in it, pleased
satisfaction with the conquests she had made. Then a cloud came suddenly
over it. “But all the same it will be cheating, oh, it will be cheating,
Matty! I won’t give it up; but you may begin to pack the boxes,” said
Nancy, suddenly. “After I have been there, I shall have to tell them
everything, and we must go away.”

“Go away! I think you are out of your senses, Nancy. We have just paid
the second month in advance, and they will never give it back; and
consider how expensive it is travelling with so much luggage--everything
we have in the world. I thought,” said Matilda, aggrieved, “that we
should at least have stayed here, now that we are here, till something
was settled, till you had made up your mind one way or other.”

“I have made up my mind. When we came here I never thought they would
take any notice of us. Why should they have taken any notice of us--a
couple of poor girls in a small cottage, not knowing anyone? I wanted
just to see what kind of people they were, that was all,” said Nancy,
earnestly. “I never thought of anything more. Why should they have
thought of us at all? We were quite out of their way.”

“Well,” said Matilda, to whom it appeared that here was a good
opportunity of showing her own superior judgment, “that was because you
thought they were not very nice people. You made up your mind about them
before you knew them. But they _are_ nice people. I never wish to see a
more kind lady than her ladyship is.”

“Matty, dear, I don’t mean to be nasty; but if you would say Lady
Curtis, not her ladyship--remember that she is my mother-in-law.”

Once more that vivid blush, too bright for anything but pleasure, came
over Nancy’s face. How much scorn, how much defiance, what attempts at
insult she had lavished upon Lady Curtis’s name; but Arthur’s mother had
called her my dear, had looked at her kindly with soft eyes; and it had
come to pass, by some subtle process, that Nancy felt herself to belong
to this soft-eyed lady more than she did to good honest Matilda, who had
stood by her so stoutly, but who naturally retained the manners of her
class, which was not Nancy’s class any more.

“Stuff and nonsense!” said Matilda. “She’s not _my_ mother-in-law. She’s
very kind, but she’s a deal superior to me; and I’ll speak respectful,
whatever you think. They _are_ nice people, as I was saying. Miss Lucy
is what I call a perfect lady;” (this, too, jarred upon Nancy’s new-born
fastidiousness; but she did not venture to hint that Miss Curtis would
be more correct) “and when they saw two young women by themselves, like
you and me, of course they took notice. In their own village, these sort
of folks are like kings and queens,” said Matilda; “everything belongs
to them. It’s not like just being better off. I understand the feeling
myself; it’s like what mother used to have for the poor things in the
court, to see they went on all straight and sent their children to
school, and so forth. Mother was not a great lady, but she was known in
the place, and took a charge like; and she was a good woman. There’s a
kind of a likeness in good folks,” said Matilda, turning away her head.
The mother’s loss was still recent, and made their eyes wet unawares
when they spoke of her; but this time Nancy was too much preoccupied to
enter into the allusion. Her own thoughts surged up and deadened her
appreciation of what her sister said; though Matilda’s ideas, if not
brilliant, were often the most sensible of the two.

“Yes,” said Nancy, after a pause; “that’s how it must be. I don’t want
to leave this little place. I like it; I think I like the country. It
may be dull, but it’s nice.”

“Very nice,” said Matilda, looking at her seventh chemise affectionately
as she finished the trimming and folded it up, giving little pats of
satisfaction to each fold, “when you have anything you want to get done
with. I should have taken twice the time to do my things if we had
stayed at Underhayes.”

“But we must go,” said Nancy, continuing. “We might have stayed on if
they had taken no notice, if we had kept ourselves shut up, and not seen
them; but it can’t be helped now. I will go to the Hall, just to see
everything. Fancy sitting down at table with them, being like one of
them! It will feel like a dream. Oh, I must, I must go just once! If
ever Arthur should come back again--”

“Of course Arthur will come back again. If you tell them who you are, as
you say you will, Arthur will come first train; and do you think
nowadays that folks can hide themselves like they used to do in the
story-books, Nancy? You may run away as much as you like, they’ll have
you back again. They will set the detectives after you. Them that have
far greater reason to hide than you have get found out, and do you think
you can keep safe? Nonsense! Once tell them, and you’ll soon be fetched
back.”

“Never!” cried Nancy. “Against my will, with detectives sent after me? I
will go to New Zealand first with you, or anywhere. Never! It is not
forcing that will ever hold me.”

“I believe there is nothing silly you wouldn’t do, if it came to that,”
said Matilda, shaking her head. It was an unwise suggestion she had
made; but after a while Nancy calmed down, and gathered up her leaves
again, and proceeded to arrange them as was her custom. She had
altogether given up the beautiful chalk cartoon which Matilda admired,
for this rubbish. How silly it was, her sister thought; though, indeed,
her ladyship was to blame, who had encouraged Nancy in this nonsensical
occupation. “What is going to be the good of all that?” she asked at
last, with a touch of sarcasm in her voice. “You can’t frame it and put
it up on the wall, to make a room look nice. It’s only lumber, and
gathers dust.”

“I am drawing something for Lady Curtis to work,” said Nancy, with some
solemnity. “When I go into the house the first time, I shall take
something with me _to give her_. I suppose you will say that is silly
too, but I like to do it. _She_ thinks they are good for something. She
was quite interested, you know. Did I tell you, Matilda, she called me,
my dear?”

