The Project Gutenberg eBook of Mrs. Arthur; vol. 3 of 3, by Mrs. Margaret
Oliphant

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Mrs. Arthur; vol. 3 of 3

Author: Mrs. Margaret Oliphant

Release Date: May 13, 2021 [eBook #65330]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

Produced by: Chuck Greif and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
             http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
             available at The Internet Archive)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MRS. ARTHUR; VOL. 3 OF 3 ***




                             MRS. ARTHUR.

                                  BY

                            MRS. OLIPHANT,

                               AUTHOR OF

                   “The Chronicles of Carlingford,”

                                &c. &c.

             “Fie, fie! unknit that threat’ning, unkind brow,
             And dart not scornful glances from those eyes.

                    *       *       *       *       *

             A woman mov’d is like a fountain troubled.”
                             TAMING OF THE SHREW.

                 “He breathed a sigh, and toasted Nancy!”
                                         DIBDIN.


                           IN THREE VOLUMES.
                               VOL. III.


                                LONDON:
                    HURST AND BLACKETT, PUBLISHERS,
                     13, GREAT MARLBOROUGH STREET.
                                 1877.

                        _All rights reserved._




                             MRS. ARTHUR.




CHAPTER I.


It was like a dream when it was all over, so huddled up at the end, so
seemingly causeless; the sudden outburst of accumulated dissatisfaction
and failure breaking out in a moment, a storm out of a clear sky, as it
were. There was no adequate reason for the catastrophe; greater troubles
had been between them before, more violent disputes; perhaps it was that
never before had there been any witnesses, nor had the menace ever
before come from Arthur’s side. When he left Underhayes, almost carried
off by Durant, yet with many stings in his heart, which in time, at
least, might slay the love that was still warm within him, Arthur could
think of his married life only as a dream. Nancy had refused to see him.
She would make no arrangement, listen to no terms, make no promises;
indeed, she would not communicate with her husband or his friend except
through her parents, and refused to say anything except that all was
over, that she never wanted to hear Arthur’s name again. The father and
mother were without any question deeply distressed. Mrs. Bates was, on
the whole, a sensible woman, who, though she might be disposed to back
up her married daughter in a certain amount of folly and hot-headedness
as to the honours and privileges which were “no more than what she had a
right to,” was yet horrified at the notion of practical divorce and
disjunction such as this; and her husband not only shared this moral
horror, but was profoundly excited by the idea of having his daughter,
whom he had believed to be provided for, once more on his hands. All
through that long Sunday, and for some days after, Durant did nothing
but come and go between the two houses with proposals of all kinds. If
Nancy would not return, would she join Arthur in London and go to Oakley
with him? If she would not go to Oakley, would she go to Vienna, where
they could make a fresh start, having both, it was to be hoped, learned
a tremendous lesson? To all these suggestions Nancy answered No. She
kept upstairs, locking her door, when her husband himself came. No, she
would do nothing. She would not go to his friends to be despised. She
would not go abroad with him to be miserable. He knew how she hated
foreign countries. She would not go home to him, or see him to discuss
these questions. He could go where he pleased, she would not put herself
in his way. She would not shame him among his fine friends. Nobody
should say she was a burden on her husband. It is impossible to imagine
anything more confused, more agitated, more feverish than the course of
these painful days; but at last it became apparent even to Arthur that
this could go on no longer. Many little indications of a state of things
which he had never dreamt of, and which was fatal to the self-esteem
which is in every man’s bosom, worked on the poor young fellow’s mind as
much as the actual grievance of the moment. That he had been thought of
as a good match was, perhaps, inevitable in the circumstances; but even
that is not agreeable; and to know that your wife has gone to her
father’s house to complain of you, is an offence which few men could
easily forgive. All this produced in Arthur’s mind an impression of
painful unreality in the past than which there is nothing more wounding,
more bitter on earth. That love should fail and hearts change is bad
enough; but that the love which you have believed in implicitly should
never have existed at all, that your affection should have been regarded
as a matter of worldly advantage, and your conduct discussed with
others, what thought can sting more deeply? It destroyed not only
Arthur’s faith in his wife, but his faith in the life they had lived
together. Hitherto it had been her too great sincerity, her incapacity
for feigning, he thought, poor fellow, which had been their rock ahead.
And now was all insincere, was all feigned from beginning to end? His
head seemed to turn, and the giddy world to go round with him, and that
wrath “which works like madness in the brain,” the wrath which is half
love, and which feels every injury with twofold aggravation of
resentment, yet yearning, took possession of his mind. It was in this
condition that he left Underhayes. Durant had made on Arthur’s behalf
the most careful arrangements for Nancy with her father. She was to
retain the villa if she chose, and the half of the allowance Sir John
gave to his son. Arthur would have given the whole, had that been
possible. As it was she would be well off, able to do as she pleased,
according to her breeding, to help her family, to occupy an important
position among them. The poor young fellow thought with bitterness that
this would be more congenial to her than any elevation which could have
reached her with him; and perhaps, indeed, there was some reason in
this, for the elevations which could reach her as Arthur’s wife were, in
a sense, humiliations. Everybody in his rank looked upon her with
wonder, with curiosity and suspicion, as on a creature of a different
race. Her actions were scrutinized, her little imperfections noted as
they never would have been otherwise. Whereas as the richest member of
the family, the one standing above them all at once by nature and by
position, the family goddess and beauty, and most successful member,
Nancy was looked up to and adored. Perhaps it was not wonderful that a
young creature with no sense of duty in her, who had expected merely, as
Arthur said, to be made happy, flattered, courted, and caressed in her
marriage, and to whom such disappointment had come, should prefer the
position in which she could regain a little of the self-pride and
complacency which was natural to her. The first blow which assails that
complacency, how terrible it is! And Nancy had been beaten down, though
she would not own it, by the sense of universal disapproval, by the
failure even of her own confidence in herself.

And it would be impossible to describe the strange desolation and sense
that all was over and ended, with which this self-willed and hot-headed
girl woke to her misery on the morning after Arthur went away. The
probation of the last few months had been very bad for Nancy. She was
not altogether unworthy, as poor Arthur was inclined to think, of the
higher opinion which had been formed of her; indeed it was the finer
element in her nature which had led her astray in the final strain and
trial. She who had been the superior of her family, who had been raised
to the poetic heaven of a young lover’s adoration, had after her
marriage plunged at once into a bottomless abyss of inferiority and
humiliation. It had begun upon her wedding-day with the vision of Lucy,
in whom her jealous, suddenly enlightened eyes had seen at a glance so
many differences, so many refinements unknown to herself--and with
Arthur’s objection to her salmon-coloured dress. Then her ignorance, her
want even of the most elementary acquaintance with the world he was
familiar with, was brought home to the alarmed, resentful girl on every
side of her. The more she found herself wanting, the hotter had risen
that suppressed fury in her heart against herself, her belongings, her
breeding, and the new circumstances which brought out all their
deficiencies. Pride first, and the vanity of flattered and self-admiring
youth had risen wildly against the apparent need of improvement, of
education and culture, which alone would have fitted her to be Arthur’s
wife; and if she rejected with proud disgust and self-assertion the idea
of improvement in herself, what was there for it but to turn her back
upon Arthur’s world and drag him into her own, where she was at her
ease, where she was still the first, whatever happened? This, however,
had not contented Nancy’s mind. She had been no more satisfied here than
elsewhere. The mere fact of withdrawing her husband into this village
atmosphere, which he supported patiently or impatiently, according to
the mood of the moment, but always with an effort, was in itself a
confession of failure. She was unfit for the society of his equals; and
he, was not he unfit for hers? None of these things had Nancy said to
herself, but they were all surging within, pushing her on by their very
tumult and unrest to ever more and more entire committal of herself to
this foolish and wrong way.

Nobody knew better than she how foolish it was and wrong; but the more
the conviction grew, the more ungovernable was her determination to be
stopped by no one, to yield to no one, to assert herself as everybody’s
equal or superior, claiming in her own right all the consideration that
a princess could command. She had never put these feelings into words,
passionate and vehement though they were, nor had she anyone in the
world to whom she could confide them. Poor girl! the conflict in her
mind had often been beyond utterance; but she had clung desperately all
through to that most variable and poorest of supports her personal
pride. And this had driven her into all manner of follies, as has been
seen, and into this culminating folly at last. She lay sleepless all the
night through, and wept, thinking of Arthur. It would be better for
him. No more would that anxious look come over his face, the look which
had driven her wild and made her ruder and more self-assertive than
ever, that anxiety as to her behaviour and her appearance which made her
tingle with the consciousness that she was still Nancy Bates, and would
still be judged as such, whatever might happen. He would not be troubled
with Nancy Bates now. He would go back untrammeled among his fine
friends, where nobody made mistakes in dress, and where everybody knew
as their A B C those things which were mysteries to her. He would be
free; Nancy jumped up in her bed clenching her hands, her eyes heavy,
her head hot, her brain almost mad with passion--he would be free! and
she left here to be sneered at, and smiled at, and pointed at--a wife, a
woman who had been forsaken. Then this furious sense of humiliation
would melt, and burst forth into a sense of something better which she
had concealed, which no one had ever known. She had been a failure; but
who would love him so well as she did among all the fine people he might
meet with? who would think of him so much? She, thinking of him, had
brought little happiness to Arthur; her love had been as a fire which
scorched and charred rather than one which warmed and gladdened--but
still, if anything happened to him, if trouble came in his way, who
would be faithful like his wife, faithful to death, ready to confront
every danger for him; but that he would never know. The convulsions of
feeling which she thus went through fortunately made Nancy ill. For a
day or two she was feverish, and kept her bed, where she was waited on
with sedulous care by her mother and sisters. They had never failed in
kindness or affection, but they were now more anxious, more concerned
than ever, for Nancy was still the great person of the family. She was
rich in comparison with them. She had a house of her own--she was a
lady. Numberless benefits might flow to them from her hands. This was
not necessary to make these good people kind to their own flesh and
blood; but still such considerations warm and quicken human feeling.
They were not fond of Nancy for what she had to bestow, but the fact
that she had something to bestow did not diminish their fondness. They
hushed the house and kept it still, making Charley’s life miserable, and
the father’s a burden to him, for Nancy’s sake. It was her nerves, poor
thing, they said, and everything had to give way to Nancy’s
nerves--things hitherto unknown in the house.

When, however, Nancy came downstairs at last, after her bout of illness,
she experienced not only the horrible sense of re-beginning which wrings
the soul after any great calamity, but a sudden and fantastic increase
of misery in the disgust which seized upon her for all her surroundings.
Not only had she a new life to begin without Arthur, without hope,
without any future widening of her horizon possible; but the home which
she had sought so anxiously, and to which she had clung in opposition to
Arthur and defiance of him, suddenly changed its aspect to her. She
felt it the first afternoon when she came downstairs supported, though
it was unnecessary, by her anxious mother, and was placed in the old
easy-chair by the fire, which was burning brightly, though it was not
necessary either, on this soft spring afternoon. She had scarcely sat
down in the chair, which was her father’s chair, close to the fire and
to the little mahogany bracket on which he placed his rum-and-water,
when this sudden loathing seized her. The afternoon sun was shining into
the room, betraying dust where dust was not expected, showing the
imperfections of everything--the old haircloth sofa in the corner, the
not very clean carpet, the table covered with painted oil-cloth.
Meanness, smallness, poverty seemed to have come into every detail. The
air was too warm, and it was not fresh, but retained odours of the
dinner, of the beer and cheese with which it had been concluded; for
Mrs. Bates had not liked to open the window to chill the air for the
invalid. What spell had fallen upon this room, which she had so longed
for, and which she had returned to with such content? How mean it
looked, what a contracted, paltry place, unlovely, unsweet! And it was
to this that she had dragged Arthur! this was the thought that flew like
an arrow through Nancy’s mind. They brought a little tray with tea, and
hot muffins to tempt her invalid appetite, and Mrs. Bates was at once
alarmed and vexed when she pushed it peevishly away and declined to eat.

“You all know I can’t bear muffins!” cried Nancy, pushing it away
rudely; and her own action made her sick with self-disgust as she noted
unconsciously how rude, how ungracious and ungrateful it was. Yes, she
was like the place, rude, ill-bred, not a lady! She could have cried,
but she was too proud to cry, and instead of this innocent relief to her
mind, became cross in her wretchedness and found fault with everything.
“Oh, how hot it is!” she cried, “how can you live in this stifling
atmosphere? One would think you were always having dinner, it is so
stuffy--open the window for pity sake!” But when the window was open
she began to shiver. “There is not a corner that is out of the draught,”
she said. Nothing that they did pleased her. Sarah Jane’s noisy ways, as
she went sweeping about, knocking down a chair here and a footstool
there, sweeping against the table, were insupportable, and Matilda’s
demure quietness not much better. Everything grated on Nancy. And this
was where she had brought Arthur! and had been angry that he was not
delighted; and now Arthur was gone never to be found any more. Oh, how
her heart sank in her miserable bosom! Then came tea, the tray placed
upon the oilcloth, and hot toast this time brought to her instead of the
muffins. The room was full now, her father and Charley added to the
group of women. Mr. Bates looked at her when he came in, sitting in his
chair, with a “humph!” of disapproval. Was she not only to be a failure
as far as all their hopes were concerned, but to occupy his place also
and put everybody out? Nancy saw the look, and jumped up in hot
resentment.

“Oh, you shall have your chair!” she cried, and retreated to the sofa,
where her mother feared she would take cold, so far from the fire.
“Cold!” cried Nancy, “I think I shall never be cool again. You don’t
know how stuffy it is in this close little room.”

“Upon my word!” said Sarah Jane. “Nobody’s obliged to stay here. It is
good enough for us, and so it might be for Nancy. I don’t see that she’s
any better than the rest.”

“Oh, hold your tongue, Sarah Jane,” cried Mrs. Bates; “can’t you see
that your poor sister is poorly and out of sorts?” But neither did she
like to hear the parlour called stuffy. If it was good enough for the
others, why was it not good enough for Nancy? And then the family
settled to their evening occupations, and the lamp was brought in, which
added the smell of paraffin to that of the tea. And then Mr. Bates had
his rum-and-water; and Mr. Raisins came to visit Sarah Jane. He came in
with a witty greeting to the family, which made them all laugh.

“Here we are again! and how was you all?” he said, with refined
jocosity; and was making his way to the sofa, which was the lover’s
corner, when he saw Nancy there, and drew up with a significant look of
dismay and a prolonged whistle of surprise. Nancy could bear it no
longer. She started up with a cry of anger, and flew up-stairs to her
room, sick with disgust and misery.

“Do you like to see me insulted, mamma?” she said, when Mrs. Bates
followed. “How can you endure that vulgar fellow? and how dares he show
his insolence to me?”

“My dear,” said Mrs. Bates, “you must not be unreasonable. He did not
mean to be insolent. If we have not the refinements you have been used
to, Nancy, still you mustn’t forget the advantages of your old home--”

“Advantages!” Nancy murmured under her breath, but pride kept down the
cry. Had not she sacrificed her life for these advantages, cast her own
existence to the winds? She went to bed miserable, and cried herself to
sleep.

This was but a melancholy beginning to the new life. When she heard
afterwards the arrangements that Arthur had made for her comfort, her
first impulse was to accept nothing.

“I am no wife to him,” she cried, “and why should I take his money? I
will not take his money. What am I to Arthur now that he should maintain
me? It is like taking charity.”

But here Mr. Bates came in, who had a certain authority in such matters,
if not a great deal of influence in other ways. Mr. Bates would stand no
nonsense. It was bad enough that the responsibility of his daughter, and
her behaviour as a married woman separated from her husband, should fall
upon her parents; but her support certainly should not, of that he was
clear. And Nancy, fresh from all these conflicts and miseries, was cowed
before her father, and dared not resist him, notwithstanding all her
efforts to hold her own. She who had not yielded to Arthur’s love and
generosity, yielded to the tax-collector’s practical decidedness. She
could not help herself. And after a few days’ growing wretchedness in
this “home,” for which she had sacrificed so much, Nancy was glad to
retire to the villa with the sensible Matilda for her companion, and
begin again as she best could in such changed and fallen circumstances
the career so perversely cut short. At least it was a relief to get away
from the stuffy parlour, and the rum-and-water, and the grocer’s wit and
courtship--all of which, heaven forgive her, she had called upon her
husband to endure.

       *       *       *       *       *

In two years from this time, strangely enough, the Bates family and
almost all trace of them disappeared from Underhayes. Nothing had
happened to them for all Nancy’s lifetime till her marriage--nothing of
an exciting kind. There had been neither misfortune nor great success in
the house; but all had gone on with humdrum regularity, unexciting,
unalarming. Mr. Bates had got a little mild promotion, and they had
saved a very little money, and for the rest had eaten and drunk, and
slept and woke, and all had been as if it might thus go on for ever. So
flows the tranquil current of life, in many cases, for years and years,
until at length the cycle of change commences, and all that has been
done is undone. Nancy’s marriage was the first family event, but it was
followed in close succession by others. Charley went to New Zealand
shortly after the separation between Arthur Curtis and his wife. Then a
little after Sarah Jane married. Then Mr. Bates, in the midst of his
tax-collecting, had an accident, and after lingering for a time died;
and Mrs. Bates, a person of apparently robust constitution, both bodily
and mental, developed all at once, to the amazement of her family and
friends, an incapacity to live without the man whom she had not been
very enthusiastic about, or devoted to, during his lifetime, and died in
her turn, leaving her house desolate. Matilda, the only representative
of the name, would have joined Charley in New Zealand but for her
sister, to whom she had proved a discreet and faithful companion. After,
however, the little house was cleared, and all the old furniture
dispersed, sold, or laid up in the house of the Raisins’ for their
future use, the two elder sisters disappeared, no one, except, perhaps,
Sarah Jane, who said nothing about it, knowing whither. The little
parlour passed away, like all the teas and dinners that had been
consumed there, and the family existence ended. Notwithstanding the
moving events that had been transacted in it, and the temporary link
which had been woven between it and the upper classes of society, its
history was all over like a bubble, like the snow on the mountain and
the foam on the river. The same fate befalls small and great; but in the
case of a tax-collector the conclusion is more complete than that which
comes upon the higher classes, which Mr. Bates respected so much. Death,
emigration, marriage, disappearance, thus followed each other in swift
succession. Young Mrs. Raisins, blooming in her shop--where, however,
her bridegroom did not permit her to appear to minister to the wants of
a vulgar public, keeping her, on the contrary, in high happiness and
splendour, and without requiring her to do anything, in her drawing-room
above the shop--alone remained of the family in Underhayes. And as for
Nancy, no one knew anything about her, nor where she had gone.




CHAPTER II.


Everything went on very quietly at Oakley during these two years.
Arthur’s visit at home was very brief, and not very lively. And if there
was a temporary sense of relief in Lady Curtis’s mind to know that he
had escaped from the influence of “those people” and “that young woman,”
it soon disappeared in presence of Arthur’s melancholy looks, and in
contemplation of the painful position of a man so young, who was
married, and yet not married, and whose path, accordingly, could not but
be full of thorns and troubles. Such a position is dangerous and
difficult in any sphere; but how much more in that to which he was
going, where every temptation of society would surround the young man,
and every freedom would be accorded to him! The mother and sister had
many a discussion over him; but how difficult it was to question him on
the subject, to pry into those arrangements of his which he did not care
to reveal, or to ask anything about the final causes of the separation!
Arthur, for his part, did not speak on the subject; when he arrived, at
first, he had let them know, in a few words, that his wife and he had
parted. “Don’t ask me about it, for I can’t tell you. I don’t know how
it is,” he had said to his mother. “She will not conform to my way of
living, and I cannot conform to hers--that is all. There is no blame;
but how it happened, don’t ask me, for I don’t know.” Lady Curtis
respected the request absolutely, and inquired no more of him. But it is
needless to say how interesting the subject was to her; and with what
eagerness she endeavoured to get the information otherwise which Arthur
would not furnish. Durant told her all that he knew personally, all that
happened under his own eyes; but this was not much more satisfactory
than Arthur’s silence. “He has an air of thinking that she was not so
very much in the wrong after all,” Lady Curtis said. “I do not
understand Lewis. You would almost think, from the letters he writes,
that she had bewitched him too.”

“I don’t think so,” Lucy said quickly, with a passing look upon her face
which surprised her mother.

“I don’t mean to say anything against her,” said Lady Curtis. “It is not
to be supposed that she has any great fault. God forbid, Lucy! I did not
mean that.”

Lucy did not make any reply. It was not, perhaps, her brother’s wife she
was thinking of. And when Arthur went away, Nancy became as if she had
never existed to the family. They had Arthur’s letters as in the days
when nothing lay between him and home; nothing but mere distance and
absence--time and space, innocent obstacles which harm no one, though
they are hard enough to put up with. And his wife, whom he ceased to
speak of, fell into the background with his people. To be sure, when
any young man in the county, or whom they knew, made a brilliant and
satisfactory marriage, Lady Curtis and Lucy would look at each other
with quick interchange of glances. And Sir John would come in, in the
afternoon, and set his back against the mantel-piece, while he took his
cup of tea, and say with a sigh, “They seem to be making a great fuss
over young Seymour’s marriage.”

“Yes,” Lady Curtis would answer with another sigh, “and no
wonder--nothing could be more suitable.” They were almost angry with
young Seymour for marrying as the heir to such a property ought to have
married; and, probably, Lucy would launch some arrow at the new pair in
sheer impatience of the praise thus accorded. “So suitable that it is
unnecessary to think of love in the matter,” Lucy perhaps would say. And
then Sir John would shrug his shoulders as he stood before the fire.

“Love! that’s neither here nor there; if all the follies could be
collected that have been done in the name of love!” And he would shake
his grey old head, and again sigh, looking with eyes of admiration at
Lucy as he went slowly back to his library, not able to get young
Seymour and his fine marriage out of his head. Lady Curtis broke into a
smile against her will as he went away.

“You are not to think of any such folly, Lucy,” she said, “your father
thinks that with your fortune you would be very happy unmarried. He says
it is only poor people who need fear the fate of old maids. This is a
great step for Sir John to take, who is such a Conservative.”

“Are old maids against the Tory faith?” said Lucy, not sorry to have
something to say.

“Yes; it is the ancient creed that every woman should marry, and that it
is only the ugly, the cross, and the unloveable that fail to attain that
glorious end. What a stretch of principle this is for your father! _I_
do not go so far even with my advanced views.”

Lady Curtis looked at her daughter curiously as she spoke. They spent
their lives together, hour by hour and year by year. They had everything
in common--when the post came in, they opened each other’s letters
indiscriminately, the last depth of mutual confidence; read the same
books, thought the same thoughts, were one in all the affairs of life;
and yet in this most intimate affair of all, the mother looked at the
daughter with unutterable yearnings of curiosity, not knowing what Lucy
thought.

Nothing was said for some time after. Spring had come breathing over the
woods, and to look between the pillars of the facade through the long
windows of my lady’s room upon the avenue, was like looking into a
wilderness of buds and hopes. “Here is Bertie coming again,” she said
with a little impatience; then laughing, “he is one, Lucy, of whom your
father is afraid.”

“Poor Bertie!” said Lucy composedly; but she was startled into dismay
when her mother suddenly burst into tears.

“To think,” said Lady Curtis, “that Bertie’s child, if he had a child,
would be your father’s heir!”

“Mamma!” Lucy blushed crimson, then laughed. “He is the second son--and
Arthur--”

“Arthur will never have any children,” said Lady Curtis gloomily, “if
things do not change. And she is young and strong, as young as you
are--why should she die to accommodate us? And Gerald Curtis is a
wandering invalid. Ah! there is no fear of the Seymours--they will have
their own flesh and blood after them whatever happens. But your father
is growing an old man, Lucy; and Bertie--Bertie’s son will be the heir!”

“He is not even married yet; there can be no need for vexing ourselves
over such a remote contingency.”

“But it will happen,” said Arthur’s mother, “though it is so remote. My
boy is like Warrington, in ‘Pendennis,’ Lucy, shut off from life; no
child for him, no love for him; all because of one foolish, foolish step
when he was nothing but a boy!”

“But, mamma! you really do not mean that boys should be permitted to
escape the consequences of such foolish steps,” cried Lucy. “How unlike
you to say so!”

“Ah! one becomes unlike one’s self when it is one’s self that suffers,”
said Lady Curtis with a sigh.

And then Bertie made his appearance, and all feeling was banished from
her countenance. She discussed young Seymour’s marriage with interest.
“Nothing could have been more suitable. So suitable that one felt
something must interpose to put a stop to it. The girl of all others he
ought to have married! And a charming girl--pretty and well-bred, and
sweet--”

“I hear they are all immensely pleased; but I do not admire her so much
as you do. She is not the style I care for,” said the Rector. “She is
too charming, and too sensible, and too everything she ought to be--for
me.”

“Faultily faultless,” said Lady Curtis smiling. She was pleased that he
did not approve of young Seymour’s perfect wife.

“And she is heavy,” said Bertie. “I used to know her very well. Her
brother was of my college. She will not be an addition to the gaiety of
the family. She has not very much to say for herself.”

“All the more suitable,” Lady Curtis said, brightening visibly, “they
are all heavy.” She had never liked Bertie so well. She told him the
news in Arthur’s last letter, that he was liking Vienna very much, and
happy in his new position; and wound up by an invitation to dinner. Lucy
sat by and worked, and wondered, not without a smile about the corners
of her mouth. She had no objection to her cousin, nor any alarm of him
in her mind. He was “not the style she cared for,” she said to herself
with a mocking echo of his speech; but that Lady Curtis, after her
melancholy anticipation of the inevitable heirship of Bertie’s
problematical son should be so easily mollified, amused her daughter.
She let the conversation go on while she worked quietly, thinking her
own thoughts. Lucy did not, perhaps, find the idea of remaining
unmarried as attractive as her father did. She smiled at that too in
her secret thoughts. Who is there that does not smile at it, being
young? Why should there be anyone in the world who was not happy--who
did not have all that the imagination desires, love and honour, and all
the brightnesses and sympathy which love can give? Lucy had a private
world to retire into at odd moments, a world so peopled that her fancy
could not receive the idea of a lonely life. While her mother and Bertie
talked, she had opened her secret door and gone in, entering into that
vague sweet blessedness of dreams which is more than any vulgar reality
of happiness. She heard their conversation, but it did not touch her.
Her head was bent down a little over that work at which she was seldom
so industrious, and even the smile was concealed that floated about her
lips--that smile which was not for her family, much as she loved them.
Lady Curtis had tried her best to lift the curtain, to look into that
secret world of which she suspected the existence, but which she had no
clue to, no thread to guide her through; but it did not occur to her to
think of this at the moment when her daughter had escaped into it from
her very side.

“So Bertie is coming,” said Sir John. “Why, Bertie? Yes, to be sure, he
is a relation, and has a claim; but I see no reason why you should ask
him so often. It looks as if you meant to throw him in Lucy’s way.”

“He will never be anything to Lucy,” said Lady Curtis, smiling.

“That is all very well; but how do you know? Girls are not like anything
else. They may hate a man one week and accept him the next. I’ve lived
long enough to see that.”

“You think they like to begin with a little aversion, as Mrs. Malaprop
says--”

“Eh? I don’t know anything about Mrs. Malaprop. I speak from my own
observation. I would not put him in Lucy’s way.”

“No one would be less likely to attract Lucy’s attention. Why, Bertie!
he is no more equal to Lucy--”

“As if that mattered,” said Sir John, with quiet contempt. “What do they
care? You’ve had one example; you ought to know better; and you will
have another before you know where you are. You are injudicious, I must
say. You don’t mind whom you introduce Lucy to, my lady; and if it is
not one it will be another,” he said, winding up hurriedly as Lucy came
in. The parents both looked at her with that tender admiration which is,
perhaps, of all admiration the most exquisite. They were not easily
pleased in respect to Lucy. Her dress, her ornaments, her appearance
were all surveyed with fastidious eyes; and from her shiny hair to the
tip of her little satin shoe, these two difficult people could bear no
imperfection in this lamp of their life. Sir John’s inspection was not
so minute or so intelligent as his wife’s; he could not tell what she
had on, or whether there was technical perfection in her toilette; but
he was very critical about the general effect. As for Lady Curtis, she
went into all the details; and they were both satisfied; it was no
small thing to say. There was a little cluster of white narcissus in her
hair, which her mother liked, but at which Sir John shook his head. “Is
that for Bertie?” he said jealously, in his mind. Girls were strange
creatures; they liked to be admired whether they cared for the man who
admired them or not; and no doubt she would fall a victim to one of my
lady’s _protégés_, if not to Bertie. This thought it was, along with
disapprobation of the flowers, as something added to her toilette for
Bertie’s sake, which made Sir John shake his head.

“The Rolts were to have been here to-day,” said Lady Curtis; “but I hear
Mrs. John caught cold at the Seymours’, and Julia has gone to nurse
her.”

“Julia is always nursing somebody,” said Sir John.

Julia was Mrs. Rolt, the wife of the agent, who was a humble relation of
the Curtises; and Mrs. John Rolt was the wife of his brother, the lawyer
at Oakenden, who had the affairs of the county in his hands.

“She will have heard everything about the marriage. As soon as she comes
back she will rush up here, wet or dry, to tell us what the bridesmaids
had on, and all about the breakfast; it is a long time,” said Lady
Curtis with a sigh, “since there have been such grand doings in the
county; not since Arthur came of age.”

“I am glad to hear that Arthur gets on so well in Vienna,” said the
Rector, addressing himself to his uncle; “that is better than the
Seymours’ junketings. I hope he’ll make a mark in diplomacy. He ought
with his abilities.”

“Ah, yes,” said Sir John; “as for making a mark, that’s another thing.
It’s very well for the present; but a country gentleman’s place is at
home in his own county. It’s all very well now.”

“Well, Sir,” said the Rector, “some of us have no chance beyond the
county, or even the parish; but when a man has a chance he ought to take
advantage of it.”

“There’s nothing better than the county,” said Sir John, “and the parish
for a clergyman. What would you have? You can’t do more than your duty
wherever you may be. I hope Arthur will stick to his, and then I shan’t
complain. If he had been at it sooner it would have been better for us
all.”

“Lewis Durant has been hearing a great deal about him,” said Lady
Curtis; “everything that is most satisfactory. Lewis is not much in
society, I suppose, his work would not permit it; but he hears
everything at the club. That is where you men get all your news. I hear
all sorts of things from him; and he knows the kind of news that is most
acceptable here.”

“There is a great deal in that,” said the Rector. “Some men make quite a
business of it. It helps a man on wonderfully; but if Durant is rising
in his profession, as you were saying, he can’t have much time for his
club. Son of old Durant, the saddler, isn’t he? How odd that such men
should be in clubs at all.”

Bertie Curtis knew exactly what he was doing; he was not cowed by the
look of indignant wonder which met him from Lady Curtis’s eyes, nor the
less open gleam of scorn and defiance which came from under Lucy’s
drooped eyelids. It was Sir John the Rector meant to work upon, not the
ladies, whom he knew to be partizans of his rival. Nobody had ever
hinted that Durant was his rival, or that Sir John was nervous on the
subject; but there are some things which reveal themselves without the
aid of words.

“Not the son, the grandson,” said Sir John. “Old Durant is dead long
ago, and left a very good fortune; but they’ve run through a great part
of it, I fear. That is the worst of fortunes made in trade; they go as
fast as they come. As for young Durant, I wish half the young men in the
clubs were half as good fellows. But he is not the kind of man, one must
allow, whom you would expect to see familiar in our houses.”

“What kind of men do you like to see familiar in your house?” said Lady
Curtis. “Empty-headed nobodies? Lewis will always make his way. He has
friends that are more worth having than we are. He goes everywhere.”

“Does he, indeed?” said the Rector; “and his profession, what becomes of
his profession? His father--or grandfather, was it?--would not have
approved of that; but lawyers, though everybody says they are so
hardworking, have a great deal of leisure, I think. How different a
clergyman is, now--”

“Cousin Bertie, were you not at Epsom or somewhere the other day?” said
Lucy, whose indignation was almost beyond words.

“Yes; I went down with Gerald, who has to be amused, poor fellow; but I
did not think anyone knew,” the Rector said, hastily; at which Sir John,
though perhaps it was not quite polite, shook his head.

“The turf is all very well,” he said. “It suits some men well enough;
but a clergyman should not get the name of it, Bertie. I don’t like it
for a clergyman.”

“Nor I, Sir; you are perfectly right, as you always are. I may have
liked horses too much in my younger days--not wisely, but too well,
perhaps--we all have some weakness; but I hope since I took orders
there has been nothing to object to,” said the Rector, looking his
astonished uncle full in the face, with mild defiance. And what could
Sir John say thus boldly encountered? “Poor Gerald is a wretched
invalid,” he continued, “sick of everything. I never saw such a _blasé_
washed out being. He has had too much of what people call life, and he’s
tired enough of it all. They think at home that his health depends upon
keeping him amused--that’s why I went,” said Bertie, with all the
innocence imaginable. “We’ve all got to amuse him, and you might just as
well try to amuse this table. He is bored to death with everything. But
then, he always was my father’s favourite, and he can do no wrong.”

There was a pause, for this Gerald, the eldest son, who was bored with
everything, and in bad health, and possessed every attribute disliked by
Sir John, was, failing Arthur, the heir presumptive of Oakley; and this
passed through the minds of all the party, bringing a pang of
unhappiness with it, as the Rector knew it would do.

“Is he likely to marry I wonder?” said Sir John.

“That is the only foolish thing he has omitted to do. It is far from
being a foolish thing with most people; but with him, worn out in body
and mind, old before his time--and without a penny, why should he
marry?”

“I am not so sure of that,” said Sir John, with a sigh; and then he
broke out hastily with an exclamation and question, in which a stranger
would have seen little coherence. “Lord, what a strange world it is! How
many boys are there of the Seymours?” he said.

That was the bitterest thought to them. Young Seymour to marry somebody
so very suitable, and failing him, if he had not married, half-a-dozen
boys to succeed! whereas Arthur had put himself out of court, and made
all succession in the direct line impossible; and there were only
Anthony’s sons to follow. Anthony’s sons! the thought was gall and
wormwood to them both. Gerald, a worn out young _roué_, and Bertie; one
of them must come after Arthur, who had cut off himself, or at least cut
off all following, all blessings of succession. And such a suitable
marriage as young Seymour had made! What wonder if it went to their
hearts.

“I’ve seen Durant at Epsom too,” said the Rector, forgetting, for the
moment, his own line of self-defence; “he’s very much about, I think;
here and there, and wherever one goes. Men of his class lay themselves
out to please; they have more motive, I suppose, than men of more
assured position.”

“Mr. Durant,” said Lady Curtis, hotly, “lays himself out, if you like
the expression, Bertie, to be of use to his friends. He has got from his
Maker one of the kindest hearts that ever beat, and consequently he is
welcome wherever he is known.”

“There is justice though in what Bertie says,” said Sir John, coming up
with his heavy forces to conclude the argument. “A young fellow like
that may be very friendly, but you can’t take his friendship for
nothing, my lady; and what would you ladies say who make so much of him,
if the tradesman’s grandson asked for one of your daughters? That would
open your eyes.”

Sir John felt that he had made a great _coup_ when he said this, and he
was glad of the opportunity of saying it; but nevertheless he was a
little afraid of the consequences.

“Take another glass of wine,” he said, hurriedly, pushing the decanter
towards his nephew. “You’ll excuse me not sitting long to-night, for
I’ve something to do.”

This cut short any indignant remonstrance that might have been on Lady
Curtis’s lips. She and Lucy took the hint and went away; but they did
not say anything to each other, as they certainly would have done had
anyone but Durant been in question. To tell the truth, the great
curiosity in Lady Curtis’s curious and lively mind was on this subject
of Durant. What did Lucy think of him? What did he think of Lucy? But as
neither one nor the other had spoken to her on the subject, how could
she interfere? She stole many a look at her daughter as they went to
their tranquil occupations together. Perhaps Lucy’s eyes were heavier
than usual, less ready to meet her mother’s; but she said not a word on
the subject; and from Lady Curtis’s side, after that utterance of her
husband’s, what was there to say?




CHAPTER III.


Thus time went on at Oakley as elsewhere with little happening, long
lulls coming after the moments of active living which tell for so much
in individual history, yet usually occupy so little space in it. Arthur
was as much away from them as if he had been at Underhayes--more in one
way, for he was now swallowed up in public life, embarked upon that
bigger sea of business or pleasure which absorbs all individual
interests. They did not hear much more of him than when he was absorbed
by his bride, and yet how different it was. Though Arthur was less
happy, though he was further off, yet he was restored to his family.
They spoke of him freely to each other and to strangers. There was no
longer any cloud upon him; he was in his natural position. It was true
that the friends of the family would turn to each other and ask in a
whisper, “Do you ever hear anything of his wife--what has become of his
wife?” after the conversation about him, how he was liking his new
appointment, and all about it, which was carried on openly. “What has
been done with _her_?” the friends said; “or was it really a marriage
after all?” Many people came expressly to put these questions to Mrs.
Rolt, who, being a distant relative as well as the agent’s wife,
naturally knew all about the family affairs. Cousin Julia was very
prudent, all the more prudent that she knew nothing about the matter, no
more than the questioners themselves. But about Arthur everybody talked
openly now, inquiring how he liked Vienna, which was a great relief from
the time when the country neighbours did not know how to manage, whether
to remain silent about him altogether, which was the safest way, or to
frame careful questions which could not compromise them. It was very
lucky that all this was now at an end; but still nobody knew much of
Arthur, and except that one rapid visit, he was never seen at home.

Arthur himself, it need not be said, had a great many convulsions to go
through. Probably he had not expected that Nancy would acquiesce calmly
in the arrangements made for her. He knew her pride, and he knew also
the relentings of tenderness that were in the girl; and in his heart he
believed that she would have scorned the money he had left for her,
would repudiate the settlement altogether--which would have made a
return necessary upon all their steps--and might, indeed, put out all
calculations by rushing back into his arms suddenly, without rhyme or
reason, and making an end of these miserable bargainings. The hope of
this kept him up, though he would not acknowledge it even to himself.
She might come, even, in her impetuosity, to Oakley--he could believe
this possible, unlikely though it was--but at least to his lodgings in
town, where he lingered, making preparations, and thinking that every
sound outside his room meant the arrival of his penitent wife. But Nancy
did nothing of the kind, as has been seen. She accepted the income, and
settled down and took no notice of him. Was it possible that it had all
been calculation from beginning to end, and that she had never loved him
at all? He never said anything of this, never betrayed his expectation
nor his disappointment, unless it might be to Durant, who knew his
thoughts before they got into words, and who also on his part had
expected better things of Nancy; for, naturally, neither of them knew
how her practical father had cowed her, and how all her tempers and
impetuosities had been quenched by the dull and vulgar obstacle of his
determination not to have his daughter back upon his hands without a fit
provision. Thus it was for the first time they did her absolute wrong in
their thoughts. When Arthur, having finally given up all those delusions
which at first had been so consolatory, but which now in their failure
were so bitter, left England, the severance was real and complete. His
mind was now at last turned violently away from the object of his love.
Passion can be borne, that passion which impels a hasty spirit to
foolish actions unintended in cooler moments; and even change can be
forgiven; but who could forgive the bitter wrong of having been chosen
from the first for interested motives, of having been the mere
representative of wealth and advancement to the woman who had accepted
his love? Was she never true at all, never tender, never touched by the
flame of love which had burned in Arthur’s breast? This was the one
intolerable thought; and when silence followed all these agitations, and
Nancy accepted without a word what he could do for her, and left him
without a word, to endure as he best might, taking mere vulgar comfort
from his hands, instead of all that he had been willing to bestow, the
poor young fellow’s heart closed with a pang against her. How much had
she cost him! but she would not permit him to cost her anything. She
would give up nothing to him, or for him. What could it have been all
along that she cared for? Not him, but what he had to bestow; and all
that had been said on this subject came back to Arthur’s mind--the
discussions beforehand, which made it apparent that Nancy had hoped to
be my lady very soon; and her complaints after, that she was so little
the better of the fine marriage she had made. These were trifles, but
such trifles as turn honey itself into gall, and make all evils ten
times worse. He was in very low spirits when he left England. When
Durant spoke of his return, he shook his head.

“It is much more likely that I will never come back,” he said. “Why
should I come back? I shall be out of everybody’s way there.”

“Arthur, you know there is nobody who wants you out of the way.”

“I don’t know it; I know the reverse. I shall be out of _her_ way. She
will be left in quiet. If I came here, I might not be able to put up
with it, Durant. And how can they look at me at home without thinking
what a mess I have made of everything? My poor father! I believe he
feels it most of all--all the more for having so little to say.”

“Come, come! Sir John will not break his heart.”

“You don’t know him,” said Arthur, glad of a reason which would justify
the desolate misery in his own. “Poor old governor! he feels it more
than my mother does. She will storm at you, or mock at you, or cry over
you, and get it out. But he says nothing; and the disappointment in me,
the failure of me! I shouldn’t wonder if they broke his heart.”

Arthur’s eyes grew red while he spoke. He was young enough to feel the
tears in their fountains; but, poor boy! while he spoke of Sir John, it
was Nancy of whom he thought. He loved her, and she thought nothing,
except allowances and comforts, of him. She would allow him to pay her
money, to share his income with her; but not to share his heart with
her, and all his thoughts. These she did not want. Poor Arthur! if that
would have done him any good, he would have laid down his head and
wept. But as it was, he had to shake back indignantly into the depths
all emotions which required stormy utterance. He could be sorry for his
father, but he must not be sorry for himself.

And this was how he went away. An attaché of a foreign Legation is not
supposed to be the most hardworking of men. Yet there are things which
they may do when it is a matter of preference for them to be occupied;
and Arthur went into society, almost vehemently, not caring to remember
himself and his position. Perhaps he did not pass through the furnace
entirely unscathed. He thrust Nancy’s image out of his heart, and shut
the door on her, and pretended not to be conscious of the efforts that
image made to get back. Not Nancy--Nancy herself made no attempt one way
or another, no overture; but her image, her recollection, that
reflection of her which had occupied him when she was gone, kept
persistently upon the threshold of the temple whence she had been
expelled. Perhaps he was not always faithful to her, but sought after
new impressions, new sensations as a man may be excused for doing to
whom the shrine of his heart has already been defiled; but he never got
beyond the feeling that she was there--his rightful queen, and what was
more his actual possessor, whatever he might think, or others might
think. Meanwhile he lived a gay and busy life. He talked and danced,
and, no doubt, flirted; for though he had made his position known, there
were plenty of people in society to whom his position was quite
indifferent; and Nancy, had she seen her husband, who was so devoted to
her, in those early days of separation, would, no doubt, have had
occasions for heavy enough thoughts on her part. But all the same, her
image was never farther off than outside the door--artificially closed
and bolted by curious devices, but of itself ever ready to open--of
Arthur’s heart.

All this, however, makes an effect upon a man; and when Durant wrote to
him, after the interval of those two years, that the parents were dead,
and that Nancy had left Underhayes, it made a great commotion in his
mind, no doubt, but it did not rouse him to instant action. His first
thought, indeed, was to rush home himself, and come to her help in her
trouble; but this was only a first thought. Why should he go, said a
soberer impulse? Had she not rejected him, driven him from her, refused
to be touched by any argument he could offer; and why should he humble
himself to seek her again without any indication that he would be more
successful this time? No, no, he would not risk a repetition of it all.
Repetitions are always to be avoided. If any lingering feeling for him
had been in her mind, would not she have had him informed of this new
state of circumstances which might have modified affairs between them?
But she had said nothing, she had taken no notice of his existence at
this moment of trouble, when her heart, no doubt, must have been
touched. He wrote to Durant to inquire into the circumstances, and to
let him know how Nancy was. But he did nothing more.

As for Durant, his heart perhaps was softer, and he wondered at Arthur’s
indifference; or, perhaps, it was only that he himself had not been the
offended and slighted person; and no one, however warm a friend, can
feel our grievances as we ourselves do. Durant had not himself been
particularly happy during these two years. He had worked hard and made
progress in his profession, but he had not made very wonderful progress.
His father, who had spent his fortune when he had one, had shown no
disinclination to go on spending when he had none; and all that Lewis
got by his labours did not seem too much to keep the paternal house
going. Whosoever will work and support other people who don’t, has to
work and be eaten up in this world. It is a common enough fate; and with
Durant, as with so many others, the miserable meanness of those who
sucked his blood and mind, always wanting more, was a heavier affliction
than the loss of his hard earnings which he took with greater
philosophy. “For what good were they to himself,” he said somewhat
bitterly. Lucy was as far, nay farther, from him than ever. He had not
been asked to Oakley at all during the last year, and though he still
saw the ladies of the family now and then, Sir John’s disapproval had
been too distinct to make it possible to disregard it, so that
everything was at a standstill in this respect. Lucy understood him, he
believed; but what would it serve him to be secretly understood if he
could go no further, if years like this were to float away before he
could approach her openly; before he could break through the obstacles
on all sides, and venture to present himself with his suit openly?
Indeed, for the last year Durant had almost come to acquiesce in his
banishment, to feel that it was better for him not to see her, not to
vex her with a sight of his faithfulness. Rather that she should forget
all about it, not linger, as he did, on the verge of despair, but be
happy whether he was happy or not. He had come this length when Arthur
commissioned him to make those inquiries at Underhayes, and it may be
supposed with how many thoughts, with what suppressed impatience of
these two, who were thus voluntarily wrecking their happiness, and
destroying everything that was best in life to each other, this martyr
to social prejudice and other people’s sins trod over again the road he
had gone with Lucy, along those streets which he had hurried through to
witness Arthur’s marriage. Had it been Lucy and he, who had pledged
their faith that winter morning, what sweet years of righteous toil,
softened and made joyful by love and sympathy, might his have been!
while the other two, who had taken the matter into their own hands,
defiant of duty, had wrecked themselves thus, and parted as lightly and
easily as they had come together. But for his father’s folly, Durant
might have had that to offer to the object of his faithful affection,
which even Sir John could not despise, and but for her brother’s folly,
Lucy would have been free to accept, or refuse, that honest offering. He
did not know that she would have accepted it--but there had been
moments in which his hopes had risen almost to certainty--only to be
cast down again into more miserable depths. Thus the two to whom honour
and duty ranked highest were kept apart, and might be kept apart all
their lives--while the two who thought but little of either (was not
this hard upon Arthur?) played with the happiness they had snatched in
defiance of duty, and threw it away. Durant may be pardoned, all things
considered, for these hard thoughts; for, modest as he was, hope had
been high in his breast when he conducted Lucy to her brother’s wedding.
But gradually, bit by bit, that hope had ebbed away. He had thought of
winning her family’s favour by his devotion to their service. He had
thought that their familiar friendship with him might have balanced the
humbleness of his birth--he had once thought his money, now lost, might
tell for something. But all had worked against him instead of for him;
while Arthur who had got the happiness he wanted, the desire of his
heart, had thrown it away. These thoughts filled his mind as he walked
through the streets of Underhayes. He went to the little house in which
the Bates’ had lived, from which it seemed impossible to believe that
the flavour of the early dinners and the evening rum and water could
have faded away. When lovely things are carried hence by death, the
vacancy is less strange almost, less poignant than when that tragi-comic
strain of grim amusement comes in, and we feel that things so earthy,
things having no affinity with a higher sphere, have come under its
sublimating touch. Could anything have made the tax-collector’s evening
potations approach solemnity? and yet there was a kind of awe in the
recollection of all those vulgar circumstances gone with the vulgar
being to whom they belonged into the darkness--into the unknown which is
not vulgar. Death is more akin to the noble and beautiful than it is to
the paltry and commonplace. It is not unnatural that those should die
and be translated into the sphere to which their finer impulses belong;
but _these_, what have they to do with dying, with heaven and hell and
the unseen? This was what Durant felt as he looked with a kind of
strange pity into the room, now occupied by a young mother with her
little children.
