"We've been trying to make them understand," said Wyatt, "that we can't
wait. There's a fleet coming right on our heels and if arrangements
aren't made right now it'll be too late for all of us."

"Well," said Bannister, sadly and without hope, "good luck."

They went about their landing.

       *       *       *       *       *

Makvern's command ship came down in one of Washington's parks. They
had decided that Makvern and Wyatt, with one man to operate the thing,
would leave the cruiser in one of the stalking-globes. There was not
room enough in it for Burdick and the other Earthmen.

Brinna had maintained a brooding silence all the way, but she broke it
now by saying bitterly to Wyatt,

"You know your people out there are panicky about this sudden eruption
from space--they'll destroy you before you can talk to them."

"I'll have to take the chance," Wyatt said.

"Just as you had to force me to take you to Washington--how long ago?"
said Brinna. She added with sudden fierceness, "God defend us from
having to do with fools!"

Wyatt grinned. "Are you angry because your schemes are ruined, or
because I'm in danger?" Before she could make wrathful reply, he kissed
her and pushed her out of his way, and went after Makvern.

They got into the red globe, and stalked out of the cruiser. They
needed the globe, not for attack but for their own defense. Above them
in the sky a squadron of skimmers wheeled, easily eluding the slower
and clumsier jets of Earth, and keeping at such a low altitude that
the planes hesitated to fire on them for fear of hitting their own men
on the ground.

The red globe stalked ponderously into Washington.

Bannister had told the truth. The city was deserted except for
soldiers. Watching the 360 degree screen inside the globe, Wyatt saw
men in olive drab fire at them and he heard the vicious battle of
bullets against their armor plate. Makvern had assured him it was proof
against practically anything short of atomic projectiles, but when
the anti-tank guns and the flame-throwers appeared Wyatt began to get
nervous and was glad when Makvern decided not to take any chances. He
ordered one of the heavy stunners unlimbered and asked for support from
the skimmers. Then he turned the radio over to Wyatt.

The screens now showed bursts of green fire all around where the stun
rays were striking. The gun crews were being struck down, the soldiers
with rifles stunned or driven back. An area of quiet was laid down
around the globe, travelling with it as it moved, constantly being
pushed ahead by the white beams of the stunners.

Wyatt talked tensely on the radio. "You force us to defend ourselves
but you will find that these men are not dead or harmed in any way,
only stunned. We beg the President and Congress to give us a hearing--"

No answer. Wyatt mopped sweat from his forehead, and talked on.

"You are faced with an enemy more terrible than any you ever dreamed
of, approaching you through interstellar space at many times the
speed of light. You see what we can do, but this is only a fraction
of _their_ power. Your only hope is to accept our offer of help, plan
with us how to stop the Task Force before it ever lands. Or you'll have
hundreds of these red globes stalking the countryside, and hundreds of
ships against which your planes will be useless as they are right now
against the skimmers."

No answer.

Makvern said to Wyatt, "We have to stop somewhere. This is your
country--what do you suggest?"

Wyatt looked at the screen. They were in front of the Supreme Court
building. Soldiers were firing at them from the approaches, the steps,
the portico. Some of them had already been stunned and were lying on
the pavement. While he watched a white beam shot out from the globe's
projector and burst in green fire among a group on the steps. Wyatt's
patience, worn thin by long anxiety, suddenly snapped.

"This place is as good as any," he told Makvern, and then he shouted
into the radio, "All right, damn it, I'm an American citizen and I came
here in good faith. I haven't committed any crime, and I don't see
why I should have to hide and cower in the streets of my own capital,
which were paid for out of my taxes. So I'm getting out of this globe,
unarmed, and if any damned fool shoots me down he can take it up with
his conscience later on."

He got up and snapped at Makvern. "Open the hatch. And pull that
stunner in."

"Brinna was right, they're panicky," Makvern said. "They'll kill you.
Wait a bit."

Wyatt swore. "We _can't_ wait, it's now or nothing! They'll stay
panicky until they actually see that I am an Earthman and not a
bug-eyed monster lying to them over the radio. Then we may get
somewhere with them."

Makvern hesitated a moment and then pressed a button. The hatch opened
and a thin ladder extended itself.

Wyatt went down it.

He went down slowly, and it was a warm day in Washington but he was as
cold as mid-December. The sweat of fear was clammy on him and his legs
shook. The soldiers in the immediate vicinity were all unconscious or
had taken cover, but more would undoubtedly come. He hoped their field
command posts would relay his radio message to the men with the guns.

He reached the foot of the ladder and stood there.

There was a great silence. Then a soldier with a rifle edged cautiously
around one of the pillars of the portico.

Wyatt watched him, thinking _He will raise that gun and fire and that
will be the end of it._

The man's voice reached him, thin with distance and surprise. "Hey,
it's a man. It's human. It ain't no monster after all--"

From inside the open hatch of the globe Wyatt heard a radio-transmitted
voice speaking.

"If you will withdraw your--er--aircraft as a sign of good faith, our
representatives will come to--"

Wyatt didn't hear the rest of it too clearly. He was struggling with
the reaction of relief. Not only for Earth, but for himself.

       *       *       *       *       *

After that it was not so difficult. Once the high brass was convinced
of the danger, and of Makvern's sincerity, things got done in spite
of red tape and provincial stubbornness. The testimony of Burdick and
Whitfield, the Apache and the Turcoman, helped immensely.

Makvern's ships were allowed to refuel and take on supplies. They took
to space again, but without any nuclear weapons aboard. "Those are my
own people," Makvern said. "I can't use that against them."

The air forces of the world were deployed as a second line of defense,
coordinated with ground-to-air missile batteries and with squadrons
carrying air-to-air missiles. On the ground, the armies readied
themselves.

Varsek's fleet came, a great dark arrow of ships into the light of the
Sun.

Once more Wyatt was aboard Makvern's command ship, on the bridge. He
was acting with others of the regular armed forces of several nations,
as liaison officer. He watched the dramatic wedge of ships approach,
catching fire on their sun sides as they drew closer until their brazen
glitter was painful to the eye. And his heart sank. What Varsek had
said was true. Nothing could stand against that fleet.

As though to emphasize that point, Varsek's face appeared in the
communic screen.

"So you decided to face me here," he said. "Good. Oh, very good!"

"Perhaps," said Makvern. "Perhaps not. Earth has been warned, Varsek,
and now I'm warning you and every man in the fleet. She has powerful
armaments, including hydrogen devices, and she is prepared to use them.
She can kill a great many of you before she's beaten."

"And who warned Earth?" said Varsek. Both men, Wyatt knew, were
speaking to the fleet as much as to each other. "You, Makvern. A
traitor's act. Every life we lose here will be your responsibility!"

"Not at all," said Makvern quietly. "You know what the situation is.
All you have to do now to avoid any casualties is to withdraw the fleet
from Earth without attacking."

"Turn tail and run?" said Varsek. "You should know me better."

Suddenly Makvern's voice blazed fierce, white-hot with old rage. "I
know you, Varsek! You'll sacrifice every man in the fleet before you'll
admit you've been bested. Remember that, you men, when he's ordering
you into battle! Try to figure out what real reason you have for
attacking and then see whether you think it's worth dying for! If you
don't--"

Varsek's great voice drowned him out. "This is a general order to the
Task Force. Battle stations, all personnel. Executive officers of
destroyer squadrons Three, Four and Five will proceed with landing
operations according to plan."

"You heard your commander," Makvern flared. "Go down and die for him,
for his ambition and the fat pockets of his friends, if you want to. If
you don't, take your ships out of formation and join us. Then we can
all go home. Then--"

"Destroyer Squadrons One and Two," Varsek's voice rolled inexorably
on, "will attack the enemy ships at once, proceeding at individual
discretion. You will use Type Two armaments--_these traitors must be
destroyed_!"

This time it was Varsek who broke the contact with Makvern, and it was
as though by that gesture he declared them all dead.

"Well?" said Wyatt tensely.

"God knows," said Makvern. He began to rap out orders, preparing to
fight his ships as well as he could.

Wyatt withdrew into a corner out of the way and found Brinna there. She
was regarding the preparations inboard and the movements of the fleet
with an expert, eager, frustrated gaze. The realization of the defeat
of her ambitious plans changed her, Wyatt thought, very little.

"If _I_ had the command here--" she said, between her teeth.

"I don't think you could swing the men in the fleet, if you had," he
said. "Maybe even Makvern hasn't swung them--"

It didn't look as though he had. The Task Force was breaking up in
orderly segments, the heavy attack craft wheeling into position behind
their destroyer screens, ready for the screaming plunge downward into
the sky. And now from their stations at either side of the forward
point of the fleet the two destroyer squadrons leaped toward Makvern's
ships.

"Type Two armaments," said Wyatt, "are the lethal ones, I take it. No
polite stunning of the victim, just good honest annihilation."

Brinna nodded, her hand closing unconsciously on his.

Makvern was hunched like a bulldog in the forepart of the bridge,
rapping orders.

"Hang on," said Brinna. "We move."

       *       *       *       *       *

They did move, roaring straight up in an effort to get above the
oncoming destroyers. Wyatt could see other ships going up with them,
while still others dropped and circled. They were trying some kind of
a boxing-in maneuver, but the destroyer squadrons were old hands at
this game too. They counter-moved with lightning speed. Wyatt did not
see any projectile pass through space, but suddenly there was a silent
blossoming of fire like the birth of a small sun and one of Makvern's
ships ceased to exist in the time it took Wyatt to blink.

"I believe," said Brinna in a steady voice, "that's the first time I
have ever seen Type Two projectiles in use except on a test range."

There was a kind of a stunned silence on the bridge. Then once more the
ship was in tangential motion, and somebody began to shout, "Look at
their formations! Some of Varsek's ships are pulling out--"

"Fire!" said Makvern, and the ship shuddered twice. White stunning
beams lanced out and struck a dark iron flank with green fire and sent
it staggering away--Wyatt assumed that these beams were powerful enough
to knock out not only men but delicate electrical equipment as well.

"They are pulling out," said Brinna. "Breaking up. Look!"

He could see that the orderly formations of Varsek's fleet had become
suddenly ragged, some of the ships frankly deserting the ranks and
others lagging as though they were hesitant.

"It was the projectile," Brinna said. "Seeing one of their own ships
full of men they knew destroyed that way--I think it must have shocked
them all as it did me."

The face of a man appeared on the screen, white and strained.
"Makvern," he said. "You know me--Shannar, commanding the First
Squadron. I'm pulling out--this is murder--"

Varsek's face appeared, super-imposed over Shannar's in a ghastly
double image.

"Follow your orders! Destroy--"

"The hell with you," said Shannar. "I'm a soldier, not an executioner."

He faded, and a second face appeared through the image of Varsek. "Me,
too. After what you've led us into, the Second Squadron is quitting."

Now Varsek's face stood clear in the screen, and outside in space the
dark ships wheeled away and joined the number that were gathering
behind Makvern's force.

Varsek, his face distorted with a violent fury, cried out, "I _order_
the commander of every ship to proceed with his assigned duties! If
he refuses, I authorize every officer in the chain of command to take
over until one loyal man is found. I order this! Prepare to land. I'll
destroy Makvern myself if none of you have the guts to do it."

And the great bulk of the flagship moved from where it had hung in
space and gathered speed, and bore down upon Makvern's command ship
like the ultimate hammer of doom.

"He must have packed the flagship with his most trusted officers,"
Brinna said.

Ignoring every other craft in space, the enormous ship rushed at them.

Makvern spoke into the communic.

"I don't think you quite understand, Varsek. The situation has changed.
You are now fairly well isolated. There's been enough killing.
Surrender and we'll see that you get a fair trial at Uryx."

"You won't live to go anywhere," Varsek snarled. He began to talk to
others who apparently were in the room with him, out of range of the
pick-up. "Why the hell doesn't the fleet move? I ordered them. Order
them again, and prepare a projectile, Type Two--What are you waiting
for?"

"Sir," said a voice, "have you noticed the disposition of the destroyer
squadrons?"

"What of them?"

"They're between us and the target. All of them. The commanders request
that you surrender. They say there will be no more Type Twos used on
men of Uryx."

Varsek spoke into the communic. "Clear the way," he said. "I'll ride
over you and smash you. I command this fleet." He pulled his side-arm
from its holster and turned around. "As for you--I thought you were
loyal to me. I handpicked you, and this is how you repay me! I order
you to prepare a projectile--"

A hard matter-of-fact voice said, "You pushed it too far this time,
Varsek. You're one man against a fleet. We have been loyal, but you're
not the commander any more."

       *       *       *       *       *

A stunner beam caught Varsek from the back before he could turn around.
He fell below the focus of the screen, and the face of another man
replaced his.

The man said, "Varsek has surrendered."

There was a long silence in the command ship. Then the men began to
cheer and other voices came over the communics, cheering, and only
Makvern turned away so that no one could see his face.

Later, after Makvern had made his speech to the fleet, taking over as
commander, he said to Wyatt,

"This is where we part. We go home, to put a stop to this looting and
pillaging--it's time Uryx grew up and became an empire to be proud of
rather than a nest of outlaws. And you can go home too, knowing that
Earth will sleep safe tonight."

Brinna stepped forward. "And what about me?"

"I have that planned," said Makvern sternly. "You'll learn about it in
good time."

Wyatt smiled, but did not say anything.

He had no chance to say anything later on, when the ship had landed
on the desert near the mesa and Makvern and Brinna had shaken hands
with him for the last time, standing on the cool sand in the moonlight
at the foot of the ship's ladder. Makvern had moved so quickly while
Brinna was occupied with her farewells that she did not realize he was
already in the lock and the ladder drawn up until it was too late to
follow him. He looked down at her and grinned, and said,

"This seemed to be the best solution to your problem, Brinna. It'll be
a long time before Earthmen get into space, and by then you'll be too
old to make trouble and I'll be too old to care."

"You mean you're leaving me here?" she shrieked.

"In the care of Wyatt, a brave and stubborn man. Goodbye. And clear
away now, we're taking off."

Wyatt hauled the temporarily speechless Brinna to a safe distance. She
watched the ship take off into the starry sky and Wyatt did not dare
say anything then.

He wasn't at all sure he had made a good bargain. But he was
determined to make the best of it.

He started out by kissing her.

After a long enough time, she stopped fighting.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE COSMIC LOOTERS ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.
